Traveling alone on foot is still a new concept in China. While some women like
the adventurous idea, they worry about sexual harassment on the road. That’s
why Chinese feminist activist Xiao Meili started her [new
project](http://blog.sina.com.cn/u/3472344150): Beautiful Feminist Walk- A
Protest Against Sexual Abuse to Promote Women’s Freedom.

Xiao, the lead actor in the Chinese version of the “Vagina Monologues”, is
walking all the way from Beijing to the southern city of Guangzhou – a
distance of about 2,000 kilometers – to protest against sexual harassment and
child abuse. She has already spent four months on the road and along the way
has been collecting signatures, staging performances and handing out
information to local governments. She has been sharing her experience on her
[blog](http://blog.sina.com.cn/u/3472344150) with photos, writing and
drawings.

![Veteran feminist activist Xiao Meili\(screenshot from
youku\)](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2014/01/屏幕快照-2014-01-10-下午12.32.57-400x224.png)

Veteran feminist activist Xiao Meili (screenshot from
[youku](http://v.youku.com/v_show/id_XNjA0NDkyNDYw.html))

Born in 1989 in China’s Sichuan province, Xiao has done many feminist projects
to promote sexual equality and freedom. On Valentine’s Day in 2012, she was
one of the three women who dressed up in blood-splattered wedding gowns in
protest of domestic violence. She once occupied a men’s toilet to protest
China's toilet inequity, calling for the government to provide more public
toilet stalls for women (according to a Time magazine
[report](http://www.time.com/time/nation/article/0,8599,1648349,00.html), men
take 30 seconds to use the bathroom on average, while women take 90 seconds).
In August 2013, she shaved her head in protest of the discrimination against
women students in university enrollment.

Xiao is currently making a living by teaching drawing and selling vintage
things through online shop Taobao. She calls for donations on her [Taobao
page](http://item.taobao.com/item.htm?spm=a1z10.5.w4002-2046880283.10.YXsjki&id=19911354022)
to support her journey. She also asks that women in local cities to walk with
her, or provide a sofa for her to stay the night.

Check out the [video](http://v.youku.com/v_show/id_XNjA0NDkyNDYw.html) below
to see Xiao in action:  

