![Poly logo](https://globalvoices.org/wp-
content/uploads/2017/03/poly_logo-800x450.jpeg)

Image courtesy Wikitongues.

_A[version of this post](https://medium.com/r12n/learning-every-language-in-
the-world-with-poly-de1fef273c58) was originally published at
[r12n](https://medium.com/r12n)._

[Wikitongues](https://wikitongues.org/) founders and directors Daniel Bogre
Udell and Frederico Andrade have embraced an ambitious mission to document —
and teach — every language in the world. And by “every language,” they really
mean every language, including those estimated 3,000+ [languages that are
unwritten](https://www.ethnologue.com/enterprise-faq/how-many-languages-world-
are-unwritten-0), the world’s 300+ sign languages, and even constructed
languages (conlangs) like [Esperanto](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Esperanto)
and [Lojban](https://mw.lojban.org/papri/Lojban).

Skepticism about such grand claims is natural, but it’s worth reviewing the
project’s work over the past several years, work that may yet warrant such
optimism. I recently spoke with them about the development of their language
documentation and learning platform called Poly.

### Wikitongues

Wikitongues is a Brooklyn-based nonprofit that emerged from Bogre Udell and
Andrade’s shared interest in languages and technology. Bogre Udell, who is
also a [Global Voices contributor](https://globalvoices.org/author/daniel-
bogre-udell/), was raised in a monolingual English household, but his interest
in languages was sparked by living in a minority language community. He spent
time in Spain, first in Aragon and later in Catalonia. Learning Catalan
greatly affected his perspective on languages, and on the world: “I started
engaging with Spain in a very different way from most foreigners, and I was
engaging in Europe in a way that most Europeans don’t.” Andrade was [raised in
a bilingual English-Portuguese household](https://creatorsandcreatives.com/as-
languages-go-extinct-2595afdf2ed4), and later picked up several other
languages. The founders shared a profound respect for the value of linguistic
diversity, and were frustrated that the issue does not loom larger in the
public sphere.

“Children are taught how many countries there are, and [are] taught the
regions of their own country,” Bogre Udell notes. “No one’s taught that there
are 7,000 languages. We still see in the media today that linguistic
discrimination is still pretty commonplace.” This shared passion for language
— paired with their backgrounds in technology and design — provides the
theoretical drive and practical foundation for Wikitongues.

![Every language in the world](https://globalvoices.org/wp-
content/uploads/2017/03/wikitonguesBanner-800x201.jpg)

Some of Wikitongues’ video participants. Image courtesy Wikitounges.

In fall 2012, Bogre Udell began video-recording short oral histories of his
neighbors in Brooklyn, asking his subjects to speak in their native languages.
New York is perhaps the [most linguistically diverse
city](https://www.fastcoexist.com/1681444/the-melting-pot-of-new-york-seen-in-
its-multilingual-tweets) in the world, with more than 700 languages spoken
there. Bogre Udell quickly acquired a diverse range of videos which he began
posting to a YouTube channel: “In just a few weeks we were able to record
something like 40 different languages.” Somewhat to his surprise, he found the
channel quickly attracted a global audience.

The following spring, Bogre Udell’s friend (and fellow Parsons School of
Design alumnus) Andrade joined the effort, and they continued recording videos
in New York, and also traveled to collect recordings from communities
throughout the US. As the project gained attention and popularity, offers to
collaborate began coming in from all over the world. Wikitongues eventually
incorporated as a nonprofit, and has coordinated a careful effort to document
language via short videos, with a primary focus placed on endangered
languages. As of this writing, the [Wikitongues YouTube
channel](https://www.youtube.com/user/WikiTongues) boasts 347 videos of
languages from every human-inhabited region of the world.

The latest video, for example, features speakers of
[Mirandese](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mirandese_language), a minority (but
co-official) language of Portugal with a few thousand speakers.

Documentation is a critical step in the revitalization process of a language,
but the path from documentation to producing new speakers is seldom direct. In
the late summer of 2014, the Wikitongues founders came across an [article
describing the work of Marie
Wilcox](https://www.nytimes.com/2014/08/19/opinion/who-speaks-wukchumni.html).
Wilcox, born in 1933, is the last fluent speaker of
[Wukchumni](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wukchumni), one of many endangered
indigenous languages of present-day California. For over a decade, Wilcox had
worked with her daughter Jennifer Malone and others to document her language,
beginning by jotting words in notebooks and on the backs of envelopes. Bogre
Udell and Andrade were deeply moved by her dedication to her work.

Through their encounters with people such as Wilcox, the pair also realized
that few speakers of endangered languages would be willing or able to
participate in a similar dictionary-creation project. “This super-laborious
process, over the course of years and years and years,” as Andrade puts it,
was simply out of reach for most people.

For Wikitongues to make the step from being a language documentation
initiative to a language revitalization initiative, they would need to help
speakers like Wilcox, and the speakers in their videos, connect more
intentionally with language learners. “We brainstormed a little bit and tried
to figure out what would be a useful, lightweight, trivial interaction that
could really amount to some good progress” towards goals of both documentation
and revitalization, Andrade explains. They envisioned a solution that was
accessible, user-friendly, and would be of use to people who hoped to document
their language and pass it on to new speakers. Work on Wikitongues’ solution
to this challenge, Poly, began in late 2014.

### Poly

With support from a [successful Kickstarter
campaign](https://www.kickstarter.com/projects/wikitongues/poly-share-and-
learn-every-language-in-the-world) last year,
[Poly](https://poly.wikitongues.org/) has been under rapid development, and
recently [delivered on a
promise](https://www.kickstarter.com/projects/wikitongues/poly-share-and-
learn-every-language-in-the-world/posts/1813010) to release a functional
version of the app on International Mother Tongue Day. Poly is oriented
towards the creation of “books,” which can comprise vocabulary, phrases, and
expressions between an arbitrary language pair. If you have been itching to
create a Lakota-French (or [Dothraki](http://www.dothraki.com/about-
dothraki/)-[Klingon](https://www.kli.org/)) phrasebook, a few clicks on Poly
can provide an appropriate development environment. In the demo below, Andrade
can be seen creating an English-Brazilian Portuguese phrasebook.

The interface is simple, responsive, and easy to use. While Poly is open for
use by any type of teacher or learner and for any language, Andrade and Bogre
Udell hope that it will serve as a useful tool for people like Marie Wilcox,
allowing for a straightforward documentation process that can be directly
oriented towards learning.

### Open source, open data, and open organization

Poly has been an [open source project](https://github.com/wikitongues/poly)
since its inception, “just because private repos [on Github] cost money,”
Andrade jokes. Poly is built on a foundation of open-source technologies: the
frontend is React, the backend is Rails and PostgreSQL. While Andrade suggests
that being open source is somewhat symbolic at this early stage, Poly has
already attracted “hundreds of thousands of dollars of development time” from
a growing community of developers. “Because we are a nonprofit and a very,
very strongly mission-driven one,” Andrade explains, “we’ve been able to
gather the support of a lot of developers.” He describes shepherding a
collaborative development process as “magical.”

Wikitongues has also developed an open approach to the data they are curating.
With guidance from Wikitongues co-director (and “[open source, open standards,
open data and localized content](http://alolitasharma.com/about/)” advocate)
Alolita Sharma, the organization is working towards making all of their
content available under open licenses such as Creative Commons, including
video content, video metadata, and Poly’s language data.

There are challenges in dealing with data produced by members of many
different communities — some endangered language communities are wary of
exploitation, and many have differing conceptions of their languages as
cultural or intellectual property. “The problem with some of the big open
source projects or free knowledge movements is there’s a certain kind of
dogmatism about what the licensing needs to be,” Bogre Udell says. While
Wikitongues’ goal is openness, it recognizes that a bespoke data licensing
approach may be necessary in some cases. The organization is actively working
to navigate this complex ethical, legal, and cultural space. “If we can
demonstrate that certain communities have been successful within our [open
data] model, we can reach out to other people who are reluctant and say:
‘look, these are the benefits,’” explains Andrade.

The open source ethos of the project goes beyond code and data. Bogre Udell
notes that the scale of what Wikitonges is trying to accomplish — to work with
every language community in the world — requires a certain openness. According
to Andrade, “One of our deepest philosophies as an organization is that we
work with communities. We don’t go and record videos to ‘bring back.’” In all
of their hundreds of videos, Wikitongues hopes to convey that there is a real
person speaking who is willing to discuss their experience in their language.

![Poly poster](https://globalvoices.org/wp-
content/uploads/2017/03/poly_poster-400x600.jpeg)

Image courtesy Wikitongues.

### All the languages in the world

Initiatives like Wikitongues are vital in the race to revitalize endangered
languages. As I’ve previously noted, developing digital language resources for
a language can help ensure the next generation has access to it, and it is
clear that most of the hard work is going to occur outside (or at best,
alongside) the commercial technological mainstream. In conversations with
major tech companies, Bogre Udell found limited enthusiasm for engaging with
languages of fewer speakers. “They want to make sure that they reach the 400
or so largest languages,” he notes. “We had a conversation with someone at
Google.org and they were very explicit that languages with fewer than 10,000
speakers were not of interest.” With Poly, Wikitongues continues on its
journey to develop an open global community focused on languages.

“As a language documentation effort, we are the only one that’s trying to work
with every language in the world,” Bogre Udell notes. “Nobody else has that
interest.” This orientation and mission directly inform the development of
Poly. “We want to create tools that are that are useful to the public,” he
argues. “We want to be more useful to the speakers of the language than the
linguists, because the speakers are the ones who need it.”

