[![](https://es.globalvoices.org/wp-
content/uploads/2017/06/Cristina-800x450.jpg)](https://kurtural.com/paisdelasmujeres/)

While attempting to obtain a psychology degree, Cristina Moreno Re (25) works
in a store, which requires her to be away from home also during the weekends.
Photography by Juan Carlos Meza, used with permission.

**_The following is a republication of a portion of the series
#PaísDeLasMujeres, part of a Global Voices partnership
with[Kurtural](https://kurtural.com/)._**

Clara Guillén was refused the opportunity to take a test at a law school
because she took her young daughter to the campus with her. “Come to study
when you have finished raising your children,” Concepcion Sanchez, a professor
at the National University of Asunción (UNA)[ told her that
day](http://www.elindependiente.com.py/facultad/profesora-se-niega-a-tomar-
examen-a-estudiante-con-hija-en-brazos/).

In May 2016 Bethania Ruiz Díaz, a student at the same school, endured a
similar fate when she went to class with her baby who was only a few months
old. ****

María de el Mar Pereira, the teacher who sent her away, [told
her](http://www.elindependiente.com.py/universidad-nacional-de-asuncion/esto-
no-es-una-guarderia-profesora-maltrata-a-madre-y-le-impide-estar-en-clase/):
“[This] is not a nursery, but a university.” She added that she should find
someone to leave her son with.

“I could not answer because it left me stunned, I felt powerless and
denigrated,” says Ruiz Diaz.

### Nowhere to turn but home

Although the professors changed their positions when the cases were made
public, Guillén and Ruiz Diaz, like many other college-student mothers, still
face a system that discriminates against mothers who want to study on a daily
basis.

The fate of the two mother-students caused the faculty’s students center (CE)
to push for the creation of a day care facility, but the proposal was not
accepted. According to Alejandro Koopmann, a member of the CE, the project
sputtered when President Horacio Cartes vetoed the necessary budgetary
expansion, along with the rest of the general budget, in 2017.

[Despite the growing participation of women in the labor market in Latin
America](http://www.cde.org.py/web/attachments/article/153/Conferencia%20Karina%20Batthy%C3%A1ny%20-%20VII%20Encuentro%20Mujeres%202013.pdf),
their historically assigned roles as carers of children and household
labourers has remained unchanged. If not mothers, then it is grandmothers,
aunts or sisters who do the region's “unpaid work”.

According to a survey carried out by the General Office of Statistics, Surveys
and Censuses (DGEEC), [Paraguayan women dedicate more than half of their time
to family care and household work,](http://www.dgeec.gov.py/news/PRINCIPALES-
RESULTADOS-DE-LA-ENCUESTA-SOBRE-USO-DEL-TIEMPO-EUT2016.php) even more than in
countries such as [Argentina
](http://www.infonews.com/nota/306332/desigualdad-laboral-en-argentina-las-
mujeres)and
[Uruguay](http://www.ine.gub.uy/c/document_library/get_file?uuid=ee729c43-9e98-4603-8803-2cee3fc11b22&groupId=10181).

“The idea that paid work might release a woman [from caring responsibilities]
has not yet occurred,” [said ](http://www.eldiario.es/economia/engano-trabajo-
asalariado-liberar-mujeres_0_262823964.html)Silvia Federici, a writer and
feminist activist, in a recent interview with [El
Diario](http://www.eldiario.es/economia/engano-trabajo-asalariado-liberar-
mujeres_0_262823964.html) **.**

“Women now have two jobs and much less time for things like taking part in
social and political movements,” she says.

Or studying, for that matter.

### Two sisters, similar stories

Cristina Moreno Re, age 25, is a fourth year psychology student at UNA who
also works as a salesperson in a store and is the mother of five-year-old
Gaspar.

“Taking care of children is a tiring and energy-consuming work,” she says. But
in the eyes of their coworkers, “women cannot get tired of taking care of our
children.”

She works a 42-hour week on average, while care for Gaspar is mostly divided
between her mother, and the mother of Gaspar's father, from whom she is
separated.

She thinks herself lucky. Since Gaspar began kindergarten she has found a
schedule that works for the entire family, and can still take him to school
every day. This is a privilege in Paraguay, where [only three out of ten
children have access to pre-school
education.](http://m.ultimahora.com/solo-3-cada-10-ninos-van-al-preescolar-el-
paraguay-n886774.html)

Perhaps most importantly, the fact that Gaspar is going to kindergarten also
allows her time to finish her degree. But at the National University of
Asunción School of Philosophy there are no alternatives for mothers of young
children.

“Faculty usually allows for children to stay in the classroom. Every year
demand for daycare [grows], but the [administration] always argues there is no
budget for it,” says Jazmin Colonel, the Vice President of the Student Union
for that University.

Although there is no data on the number of students who drop out of school to
fulfil their childcare responsibilities, Colonel says that many do so.

The situation of student-mothers at private universities is actually no
different. Cristina’s 24-year-old sister, Romina Moreno Re, attends a
veterinary school at Columbia University in the capital city of Asunción.

She went into labour right after a school test. Giving birth to her daughter
Alicia prevented her from finishing her tests.

“According to them [the provost at her University], it was too late when I
applied for a delay [to have an extension],” she said.

Like Cristina, Romina Moreno also depends on her mother to look after her
daughter, who is now 20-months-old.

“My mother works in a store […] If her or my sister cannot babysit my
daughter, then my husband does. He watches her, but not as much as I do, which
is 20 hours per day”, Romina explains.

The difference in society's expectations regarding the time men and women
should spend watching their children is reflected in the different lengths
allowed for maternity and paternity leave in Paraguay; maternity leave is 18
weeks, while paternity leave is two weeks.

Romina used to work organizing social events, but is only attending school
currently. Motherhood has changed many aspects of her life.

“People no longer invite you out, or they ask you to come with your children;
if you go by yourself they ask you who you left your children with. [This is]
something men are never questioned on,” she says.

If the access to pre-school education is limited, coverage of child care
services, whether public or private are almost non-existent. The Secretary of
the Children’s Office in the country says that it does not even have data on
childcare services in the country.

The resonance of the events that occurred at the law school in UNA inspired a
congressional bill that Representative Hugo Rubin initiated. The bill would
force both public and private universities to allocate money for day care
facilities, but it is still awaiting approval.

Since “the provision of child care has not yet reached the category of a
societal right”, says sociologist Karina Batthyány, the greatest challenge is
faced by women in the lower and middle classes, who often have to decide
between work and attending school.

For mothers such as Bethania Ruiz, and Cristina and Romina Moreno, the
traditional ‘chain of care’ — mothers, sisters and mothers-in-law — is the
only form of support there is.

