_As part of our collaboration with[Syria Deeply](http://www.syriadeeply.org/)
we are cross-posting a series of articles that capture civilian voices caught
in the crossfire, along with perspectives on the conflict from writers around
the world._

Azaz, Syria: The Turkey-based Kurdish Workers’ Party (PKK), and its Syrian
political wing, the Democratic Union Party (PYD), have stumbled into a
precarious situation. They are now administering a string of towns and cities
along the Turkish border after the Syrian army handed the PKK control of the
territory last summer.

What should have been a dream come true for Kurds—who have long been
discriminated against in Baathist Syria and aspired to have an independent
state—quickly devolved into an even more oppressive replica of their lives in
Assad’s Syria.

![](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-content/uploads/2013/01/Saladin-
Brigade-300x200-1.jpg)

Bewar Mustafa, second left, Shawqi Othman, second right, and other Saladin
Brigade members. Credit: Mohammed Sergie

“We can’t open our mouths,” said Walato, a pro-democracy activist from
Jinderes, a Kurdish town north of Aleppo. “We have less freedom under the PKK
than we had under the Assad regime.”

For activists like Walato who live in PKK-controlled towns, coexisting with
the new rulers means operating with even more secrecy than under the Assad
regime. Kurdish towns like Afrin, Amouda and Kobani came out in large protests
early in the Syria revolution, but these displays of defiance and solidarity
with the rest of the country have become rare.

“The PKK even erased the word ‘Yasqut’ [meaning in Down with Assad] from the
walls,” Walato said. “Activists are often harassed for nonpolitical efforts
like organizing humanitarian aid.”

(For more on the Kurds in Syria click
[here](http://www.crisisgroup.org/~/media/Files/Middle%20East%20North%20Africa/Iraq%20Syria%20Lebanon/Syria/136-syrias-
kurds-a-struggle-within-a-struggle.pdf) for a recent study by the
International Crisis Group and [here](http://henryjacksonsociety.org/wp-
content/uploads/2012/10/HJS_Unity-or-PYD-Power-Play_-Report.pdf),
[here](http://www.scpss.org/libs/spaw/uploads/files/Reports/03-2012_Henry_Jackson_Soc_Rpt_re_Role_of_Syr_Kurds.pdf)
for two reports from the Henry Jackson Society).

Commanders of the Saladin Brigade, which fights in Aleppo, weren’t surprised
when the PKK ended up controlling Kurdish towns. The PKK was the only group
with the arms and organization able to fill the vacuum. But there was a reason
it was so organized. Colonel Shawqi Othman, who heads the Saladin Brigade,
said the PKK was supported by Hafez al Assad, in order to fracture Syria’s
Kurds and to pressure Turkey by bolstering a secessionist current within
Kurdish politics.

There is also a sectarian reason why the Assad regime backs the PKK, according
to Othman. Most of the PKK’s leadership hails from a rarified minority:
Alawite Kurds. Abdullah Ocalan, one of the PKK’s founders who was based in
Syria and is now in a Turkish prison, is an Alawite, Othman said. Kurds make
up more than 10% of Syria’s 23 million citizens, and the vast majority of them
adhere to a moderate version of Sunni Islam.

Although PKK officials deny ties to the Assad regime, its top spokesman was
cagey when asked where their weapons come from, according to a Washington-
based researcher who covers the group closely and met with its leadership
recently. Syria Deeply wasn’t able to interview PKK officials on the ground
inside Syria.

Though Kurdish activists and rebels say they are stifled and threatened by the
PKK, they have decided not to confront the group in order to avoid an
internecine conflict among the Kurds.

Tensions remain high among armed factions, however. Captain Bewar Mustafa, the
first Kurdish officer to defect from the Assad regime, and a [founder of the
Saladin Brigade](http://beta.syriadeeply.org/2013/01/kurdish-fighters-aim-
balance-islamist-forces/#.UP5n1SdEGSp) that fights in Aleppo, says he’s on the
PKK’s hit list, as are some of his comrades.

Othman says his group will try to avert bloodshed with its ethnic brethren and
are willing to wait for the local Kurdish population to turn against the PKK.
It might not be too long now. Walato says that the excesses of the PKK, such
as enacting taxes or tying prisoners to poles in town squares for days at a
time, are denting the group’s popularity. Still, the threat from extremist
Islamists has forced Kurds to be cautious of withdrawing support for their
most powerful militia.

“If the choice is between Jabhat al-Nusra or the PKK, I will always choose the
PKK,” said Mohammed Suleiman, an activist who works closely with the Saladin
Brigade and who calls the PKK mercenaries and criminals.

Kurds have a reason to be worried. Deadly [clashes between rebels and PKK
fighters](http://www.news24.com/World/News/Syria-Clashes-pit-Kurds-against-
jihadists-20130118?) erupted in Ras Al Ain last week. Islamists brigades used
a tank to the shell the city (video below), which borders Turkey in Syria’s
northeast and has been under nominal PKK control for months. Kurdish and Arab
opposition [leaders urged an end to the
violence](http://www.dailystar.com.lb/News/Middle-
East/2013/Jan-19/202956-kurds-demand-support-from-syria-opposition-as-rebels-
attack.ashx#axzz2Id7w2sEi) and Abdulbaset Sieda, a Kurd and former president
of the Syrian National Council, [said that fighting in Ras Al Ain is
futile](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=dt4j6wWbb_c) because it won’t settle
the war against the Assad regime.

This isn’t to say Kurds don’t have some admiration for the Islamists. Indeed,
the Saladin Brigade has fought with some groups. Sharvan Ibesh, a doctor who
operates surgery centers in Aleppo and near the Turkish border, credited
Jabhat al-Nusra with maintaining momentum and repelling regime counterattacks
in Aleppo.

“The Islamist brigades are carrying the heavy load in the fight,” he said.

(Corrections: An earlier version of this article incorrectly reported that the
string of towns in Syria are controlled by the U.S. and the PKK., and also
stated that Ocalan was Syrian. He is Turkish. The mistakes are corrected in
this version).

