_Volume Vivo_ (“Live Volume”), an independent Brazilian Web series about São
Paulo's water crisis, is an exploration of the hidden structure of one of the
world's largest and most chaotic cities.

The Web series covers multiple aspects of the [water crisis that hit São Paulo
more than a year ago](https://globalvoices.org/2014/10/17/sao-paulo-is-
running-out-of-water-but-authorities-say-theres-no-need-for-rationing/) and
still shows no signs of ending. From the politics behind São Paulo's water
management to the illusion of water as a limitless resource, the show presents
a whole picture of the city's dire predicament. It features a wealth of data,
as well as interviews with experts, citizens, and farmers affected by the
catastrophe.

The show's title is a play on the expression “dead volume,” which most of São
Paulo's residents learned in the past year. The so-called “dead” reserves are
found in the body of water that lies at the bottom of a lake. This water is
typically not altogether safe to drink. Sabesp, the utility company that
manages São Paulo's water supply, has been collecting water from those
reserves since the reservoirs started to dry up.

![The Cantareira System, which supplies half of São Paulo city, has been
operating at bare-minimum capacity since 2014. Photo:
Demotix](https://globalvoices.org/wp-
content/uploads/2015/09/6853933-800x450.jpg)

The Cantareira System, which supplies half of São Paulo city, has been
operating at bare-minimum capacity since 2014. Photo: Demotix

According to _Volume Vivo’_ s [official
website](http://www.volumevivo.com.br/en/about/), “the crisis is an opportune
moment to reflect on the use of an essential resource to human life in
Brazil's most populous region.”

Entirely crowdfunded, the series was directed by young Brazilian filmmaker
Caio Silva Ferraz. In 2009, he produced the acclaimed documentary _Entre Rios_
(“Between Rivers”), which tells the history of São Paulo's urbanization and
the city's changing relationship with its rivers.

Two episodes have been released so far. The first, named “The Denial of the
Crisis,” addresses how the São Paulo state government downplayed the
seriousness of the crisis in 2014 in order to avoid political turmoil ahead of
elections.

The second episode, [“Inner
Water,”](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=l2RoQpUjt70) exposes the bizarre
logic of a managerial strategy that collects water in increasingly far-away
sites, while polluting the city's own river basins.

For now, only the first episode has English subtitles.

