**_This post is part of our[International Relations &
Security](https://globalvoicesonline.org/specialcoverage/international-
relations-security/) coverage._**

In April of this year,[ Israel’s Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu
dubbed](http://www.egyptindependent.com/news/netanyahu-sinai-has-turned-kind-
wild-west) the Sinai Peninsula of Egypt a “kind of Wild West” after rockets
fired from there targeted the resort town of Eilat. According to Netanyahu,
the peninsula is exploited by Islamist militants helped by Iran to smuggle
weapons and stage attacks on Israel. In August, 16 Egyptian border guards were
killed in an attack by Islamist militants who then crossed the border. This is
one of a string of violent incidents since Muslim Brotherhood candidate
Mohamed Morsi was elected president of Egypt in June.

Since the fall of the Mubarak regime, Egypt has had to recalibrate its
interactions with Israel and Palestine. The August attack exposed a[
particular set of vulnerabilities](http://www.acus.org/egyptsource/sinai-
attack-reveals-more-just-security-vulnerabilities) in Egypt’s security
policies. The country was already shaken by[
riots](http://english.ahram.org.eg/NewsContent/1/64/49381/Egypt/Politics-/One-
dead-as-clashes-erupt-at-Cairos-Nile-City-Towe.aspx) and sectarian violence
challenging Morsi’s presidency, and the border incident placed the spotlight
on the messy question of who actually controls the country’s national security
policy.

Is it the President jointly with the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, or the
intelligence services, or the military… or all of the above? Before, active
involvement of the presidency in the joint activities of the armed forces
(SCAF) and intelligence agencies used to be the rule.

[![From the series "Sinai's most wanted militants", by Mosa'ab Elshamy. Image
used with permission.](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2012/12/sinai-
mosaaberizing.jpg)](http://www.flickr.com/photos/mosaaberising/8103854543/in/set-72157631805780822/)

From the series “Sinai's most wanted militants”, by Mosa'ab Elshamy. Image
used with permission.

In response to the Sinai aggression, Egypt closed the Rafah Crossing
indefinitely, a move[ denounced by
Hamas](http://www.egyptindependent.com/news/hamas-leader-closing-rafah-
crossing-collective-punishment) in Gaza as “a collective punishment for all
Palestinians…” Mubarak-era Minister of Foreign Affairs[ Amr Moussa called for
the revision of the Camp David
Agreements](http://www.egyptindependent.com/news/moussa-calls-israel-peace-
treaty-amendment-sinai-security) whereas[ many observers
argued](http://www.egyptindependent.com/news/observers-slam-sinai-attack-
demand-tighter-security) in favor of improved interactions with the Bedouin
tribes or even the redeployment of forces in the Sinai region. This idea would
not be far-fetched, as sending Egyptian forces into Sinai is part of the
Egypt-Israel Peace Treaty anyway.

The whole process of [Sinai's remilitarization further
questions](http://www.gatestoneinstitute.org/3293/egypt-rearming-sinai) the
crucial – and thus far, discrete – role of the USA in this region's dynamics.

In a[ series of tweets](http://storify.com/arabist/ezzedine-fishere-on-the-
sinai-attacks) [Ar], Egyptian analyst Ezzedine Fishere explained the need for
a transparent policy highlighting that a much clearer stance towards both
Israel and Palestine has to be adopted.

Given the complex context and the obscure rationale behind August’s attack in
Sinai, “all sorts of conspiracy theories are afloat,”[ argued Egyptian blogger
The Arabist](http://www.arabist.net/blog/2012/8/6/on-the-attacks-in-
sinai.html), continuing:

> … Egypt needs to act to reimpose itself strongly in the area: through a
> zero-tolerance for criminal gangs and armed groups, Bedouin or foreign, and
> through a genuine policy of development, job-creation and integration of
> Sinai into the national economy. It's not easy, it's long-overdue, and it
> needs to start sooner than later even if strong-arm tactics that will
> probably be involved may cause more trouble in the short-term.

Highlighting a[ recently published photo essay by Mosa’ab
Elshamy](http://www.acus.org/egyptsource/photo-essay-security-sinai), the blog
‘This Ongoing War’[ points
out](http://thisongoingwar.blogspot.fr/2012/10/30-oct-12-egypts-sinai-problem-
and-ours.html):

> Needless to say, given its physical proximity to Israel, Sinai is not only
> an Egyptian challenge. That it gets such a small degree of media attention
> is a puzzle.

Morsi’s beginnings in office were marked by a widely decried [crackdown on
freedom of expression](http://cpj.org/2012/08/egyptian-government-attempts-to-
suppress-the-media.php), and the sacking of until-then almighty military
officials making the President what many [defined as the ‘new
dictator’](http://www.washingtoninstitute.org/policy-analysis/view/egypts-new-
president-moves-against-democracy). Is the media silence politically motivated
in the name of [“balancing security and civil
liberties”](http://www.brookings.edu/research/opinions/2012/08/20-egypt-
hamid)? While events in Sinai go underreported and the power structures of
Egypt are still unsettled, it’s difficult to make estimations about how ‘wild’
this ‘west’ is.

_Egyptian photographer Mosa'ab Elshamy has a few[series of photos on
Sinai](http://www.flickr.com/photos/mosaaberising/collections/72157631805531047/),
featuring not only [Sinai
militants](http://www.flickr.com/photos/mosaaberising/sets/72157631805780822/with/8103854543/),
but also [archeological treasures in the
region](http://www.flickr.com/photos/mosaaberising/sets/72157631805489216/)._

[![ISN logo](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2012/04/ISN-c100m30_100x75.gif)](http://isnblog.ethz.ch/)This
post and its translations to Spanish, Arabic and French were commissioned by
the International Security Network (ISN) as part of a partnership to seek out
citizen voices on international relations and security issues worldwide. This
post was [first published](http://isnblog.ethz.ch/security/the-sinai-
peninsula-egypts-wild-west) on the [ISN blog](http://isnblog.ethz.ch/), see
similar stories [here](http://isnblog.ethz.ch/category/global-voices).

