**_As part of our collaboration with[Syria
Deeply](http://www.syriadeeply.org/) we are cross-posting a series of articles
that capture civilian voices caught in the crossfire, along with perspectives
on the conflict from writers around the world. _**

Millions of Syrians are using social media tools such as Facebook, Twitter,
YouTube and Skype to disseminate and discuss the conflict. Each week our
Mohammed Sergie monitors the online conversation in English and Arabic,
pulling out the highlights in a feature called the Social Media Buzz.

Apart from the relentless rounds of global diplomacy, recent headlines on
Syria have focused on the rise of extremist brigades calling for an Islamic
state and fears about the fate of Syria’s minorities. They have overshadowed
episodes of civilian suffering, like the estimated [fiftieth air strike of a
bakery](http://www.csmonitor.com/USA/Foreign-Policy/2012/1224/In-war-torn-
Syria-tactic-of-targeting-civilians-is-on-the-rise) in a Sunni neighborhood.
That’s led to complaints across Syrian social media that some crimes are being
amplified while others are ignored.

Some of those online voices are calling attention to one visual element often
overlooked in the press: videos leaked from the Syrian military. Just as
rebels record some of their worst behavior, Syrian soldiers and pro-Assad
militias have documented their brutality. By some act of defiance or
deliberate messaging, those images make their way to the Syrian public. These
leaked videos show how soldiers stomped on [unarmed
protesters](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=NSuEHY4L9hk) and lit unguided
[”barrel” bombs with their
cigarettes](http://www.youtube.com/watch?feature=player_embedded&v=8IYbsnAfcRQ)before
tossing them out of a helicopter. One video that went viral was allegedly shot
in Al Hiffa, a Sunni town in the Alawite mountains that was [shelled by the
Syrian military in
June](http://www.aljazeera.com/news/middleeast/2012/06/201261503338837464.html)
after rebels took control of the town. A Syrian soldier confronts civilians in
the street.

It’s a short scene (above). A man is kicked and punched. Three women,
including a teenage girl, were a few meters away. The soldier turns his
attention to them, slaps the girl and rips off her veil, while hurling
obscenities at the women. He tells the man that he plans to violate his
sister. Another soldier mocks the women and calls them jihadis.  

![Some of Jihad Makdisi's direct messages to Syrian activist Rami Jarrah on
Twitter ](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2013/01/makdisi-153x300.gif)

Some of Jihad Makdissi's direct messages to Syrian activist Rami Jarrah on
Twitter

  
In the realm of high profile defections, conflicting stories have emerged
about Jihad Makdissi, the deputy foreign minister and spokesman, in the weeks
since he left Damascus. Did he defect, is he on a three-month vacation, did
Hizbollah nab him in Beirut or is he[providing intelligence to the U.S. in
Washington](http://www.guardian.co.uk/world/2012/dec/24/syrian-official-us-
intelligence-agencies)? As we wait for the man to speak for himself, here’s a
purported private Twitter conversation Makdissi had with Rami Jarrah, a well-
known activist, who blogs under the pseudonym Alexander Page.

Makdissi gives Jarrah a glimpse of his mindset, sympathetic to the “heroic
actions of the Syrian people.” Jarrah tells Makdissi how he was detained by
the security apparatus in Syria and slapped with a travel ban years before the
revolution. He urges the diplomat to defect or take a real stand with the
people. More of the interaction is posted at
[@AlexanderPageSY](https://twitter.com/AlexanderPageSY). Global Voices Online
covered the story [here](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2012/12/26/syria-
negotiating-defection-on-twitter/).

Our last snapshot of the week examines the now familiar tensions between
Islamist and more secular opposition groups in rebel controlled territories in
Aleppo. Protesters gathered on Friday at their usual spot in Bustan Al Qasr, a
working class neighborhood in Aleppo that has been shelled repeatedly since
July. They start singing songs of revolutionary defiance. But fans of the more
extremist Islamist fighting groups refused to join the secular chants and
tried to force the crowd to repeat their own calls for an Islamic state. An
argument ensued.

Despite the reports of live fire used on the crowds, no serious injuries were
reported. But [activists condemned the
violence](https://www.facebook.com/ghassan.yasin1/posts/459520984112448) and
equated the Islamists’ behavior with the Assad regime’s crackdown on peaceful
protests.  

![Islamic chants in Al Bustan ](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2013/01/islamic-chants-in-bustan-al-375x159.gif)

Islamic chants in Al Bustan

  
Continuing on the Islamist theme, pro-Assad outlets and anti-Islamists have
been circulating videos of alleged protests in Aleppo that repeat the chant:
“The Free Syria Army are thieves, we want the official army.” The first video
was broadcast [on state TV](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=KpXLLqo8emc),
though the audio seems to be looped and doesn’t match the video. Then the same
audio seemed to be dubbed onto a protest [in Aleppo from April
2011](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=iYBb0XUotFA&sns=em) and re-released [as
anti-rebel demonstration](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=DAiZl7BwHI4&sns=em)
in December 2012. All is fair in the virtual war for Syria.

