**_This post is part of our special coverage[Syria Protests
2011/12](https://globalvoicesonline.org/specialcoverage/syria-
protest-2011/)_**

Among the many Syrian cities and towns making news headlines today is Homs, a
city which dates back to 2300BC. The colossal damage months of shelling has
done can be seen in the destruction of historic buildings and architecture,
hundreds of thousands of refugees and thousands of martyrs.

**Homs in history**

The 4,300 years old (the earliest settlement 2300 BC)
[Homs](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Homs), historically known as
[Emesa](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Homs) (an assemblage of the locally
revered sun god), is the third largest city in Syria and is a sister of [Belo
Horizonte](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Belo_Horizonte "Belo Horizonte") city
in Brazil. Homs has a list of historic landmarks, such as the mosque [Khalid
ibn al-Walid](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Khalid_ibn_al-Walid_Mosque), roofed
souks, and contains world heritage sites such as [the Krak des
Chevaliers](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Krak_des_Chevaliers) and the [Citadel
of Salah Ed-Din](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Citadel_of_Salah_Ed-Din), one of
the most important preserved medieval castles in the world.

Few people might know that the Holy Belt of Saint Mary is within the treasures
of [Um al-Zennar Church](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Um_al-Zennar_Church)
while the 5th-century [Church of Saint
Elian](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Church_of_Saint_Elian), contains his own
tomb.

[![](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2012/11/561077_294591273942537_325550757_n1.jpg)](http://archaeolife.blogspot.com.br/2012/08/the-
damage-of-um-al-zennar-saint-mary.html)

The Damage of (Um Al-Zennar) Saint Mary Church of the Holy Belt in Homs,
Syria. Source: [Archaeo life
Blog.](http://archaeolife.blogspot.com.br/2012/08/the-damage-of-um-al-zennar-
saint-mary.html)

Historically, Homs was a city of funny and weird mysteries. In December 1260,
Hulagu was defeated at the [First Battle of
Homs](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/First_Battle_of_Homs "First Battle of
Homs"). The Mongols did not enter the city of Homs, unlike other Syrian cities
and other cities in the East, while there is a myth saying that scorpions
can't live in Homs due to high rate of mercury in its soil. [Orontes
River](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Orontes_River) which passes the city is
the only river that runs from the south northwards while its streets are
almost free of beggars, actually due to the efforts of the good people and
effective social services run by the community.

A rare video of the Syrian city of Homs shared by [IBN
HOMS](http://www.youtube.com/user/Homs2010?feature=watch) on Youtube, marks
the images between 1880 and 1950.

**Homs under attack**

Although the city had given Syria [three of its
presidents](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_Presidents_of_Syria), from
[Atassi](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Atassi) family, and is the hometown of
Assad´s family wife (Alakhras), “Homsi” protesters were among the first
Syrians to take to [streets in
thousands](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2011/04/20/syria-homs-protests-
attract-thousands-video/) to protest against the Syrian regime. Ever since,
the city have been suffering from heavy shelling for months despite a call to
[Save Syria's threatened heritage
sites](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2012/08/29/syria-sos-to-preserve-the-
heritage/), including the [historic district of Bab Al
Dreib](https://www.facebook.com/media/set/?set=a.357149667686697.72817.168536393214693&type=1).
YouTube user [Saif
Hurria](http://www.youtube.com/user/alsamuray2?feature=watch) reports about
[English] the collapsed buildings and the massive destruction in Jourat
alshiah neighborhood.

On tumblr, [salt-and-filfil](http://salt-and-filfil.tumblr.com/) posted a
photograph which compares Jourat alshiah neighborhood between 1930-2012.

[![](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2012/11/tumblr_mccynq4EWR1rwkuqdo1_500.jpg)](http://salt-and-
filfil.tumblr.com/post/34174003494/homs-city-before-assad-1930-homs-city-
after)

Homs city before Assad, 1930- Homs city after Assad, 2012. Source: salt-and-
filfil on Tumblr.

Also,
[SyriaAustraliaTv](http://www.youtube.com/user/SyriaAustraliaTv?feature=watch)
reported (subtitled in English) the destruction of the buildings in AlQusour
neighborhood on 11 October 2012.

And another video by the same user
[SyriaAustraliaTv](http://www.youtube.com/user/SyriaAustraliaTv?feature=watch)
demonstrates the colossal destruction caused by one rocket on October 7, 2012.

**Martyrs and refugees**

According to [Shaam News
Network](http://shaam.org/statistics/%D8%A5%D8%AC%D9%85%D8%A7%D9%84%D9%8A-%D8%A7%D9%84%D8%B4%D9%87%D8%AF%D8%A7%D8%A1)
S.N.N, Homs had more than 7,208 martyrs and most of its inhabitants fled their
homes as part of 2 million refugees. Thousands of Syrian refugee children who
are at serious risk from freezing temperatures, as winter sets in the Middle
East, are being supported by [Save the
Children](http://www.savethechildren.org/site/c.8rKLIXMGIpI4E/b.7998857/)
organization which is:

> Providing the basics they need, like food and blankets and offering programs
> to help them cope with tragedy. But the numbers of children escaping the
> violence are rising every day and we’re facing a refugee crisis which is set
> to get worse. [Please donate
> today](https://secure.savethechildren.org/site/c.8rKLIXMGIpI4E/b.7998763/k.FEA/Donate_to_the_Syria_Children_in_Crisis_Fund/apps/ka/sd/donor.asp).
> Together, we can help many more Syrian refugee children deal with what
> they've been through, rebuild their lives and recover from the scars of a
> brutal war.

**_This post is part of our special coverage[Syria Protests
2011/12](https://globalvoicesonline.org/specialcoverage/syria-
protest-2011/)_**

