![Refugees at Keleti train station in Budapest, September 2015. Photo by
Mstyslav Chernov via Flickr \(CC BY-SA
4.0\)](https://advox.globalvoices.org/wp-content/uploads/2015/09/Keleti-
Budapest-Sept-2015-Mstyslav-Chernov-800x533.jpg)

Refugees at Keleti train station in Budapest, September 2015. Photo by
Mstyslav Chernov via Flickr (CC BY-SA 4.0)

#### **Global Voices Advocacy's Netizen Report offers an international
snapshot of challenges, victories, and emerging trends in Internet rights
around the world.**

Stories of refugees moving en masse to Western Europe from Syria and other
conflict-ridden countries have moved into digital rights territory, as access
to communications networks has become [vital for
those](http://www.bbc.com/news/world-europe-34171687) navigating unfamiliar
terrain on foot while facing increasing pressure from border authorities in
Southern and Central Europe. Alongside mapping and GPS applications, messaging
services and social networks are critical tools for people to communicate and
strategize among themselves.

In Hungary, Serbia, and Germany, [local volunteers have
responded](https://www.newscientist.com/article/dn28137-tech-helps-refugees-
make-journey-and-survive-when-they-arrive/) by providing refugees with mobile
phones, phone credit, and WiFi access by whatever means necessary. [Kate
Coyer](http://spp.ceu.edu/people/kate-coyer), a professor of communications
studies at Central European University in Budapest, has worked with colleagues
and friends to bring portable WiFi hotspots to crowded areas, along with power
strips and backup batteries for mobile phones. In an [interview with New
Scientist](https://www.newscientist.com/article/dn28137-tech-helps-refugees-
make-journey-and-survive-when-they-arrive/), Coyer said, “I don’t ever want to
pit humanitarian needs in a crisis against each other, because it’s not an
either-or, but the communication needs are obviously very vital and need to be
available at a moment’s notice.”

Online discussions about the mass influx of people into Western Europe have
turned hateful in some social media circles, with multiple local German
politicians receiving threats of violence and even death in response to their
work to help welcome newcomers to their communities. German MP Ozcan Mutlu,
who is of Turkish origin, reported that he[ received a
message](http://www.bbc.com/news/world-europe-34220796) telling him: “it's
time to get Auschwitz, Buchenwald, etc working again – that's where you filthy
Turks belong!”

##### Read more of our special coverage: [Streams of Refugees Seek Sanctuary
in Europe](https://globalvoices.org/specialcoverage/streams-of-refugees-seek-
sanctuary-in-europe/)

Similar tensions are playing out on Facebook, and have provoked criticism from
[users and political leaders](http://www.bbc.com/news/world-europe-34220796)
who say the company is not doing enough to curb or respond to hate speech
targeting refugees. The company this week[ announced
plans](http://www.theverge.com/2015/9/15/9329119/facebook-germany-hate-speech-
xenophobia-migrant-refugee) to work with the German government to limit hate
speech and xenophobia on their networks, after German Justice Minister Heiko
Maas spoke about the matter directly with Facebook executives. Maas announced
a task force including Facebook, the Ministry of Justice, Internet service
providers and other social networks that will aim to identify hateful content
and remove it more quickly from the platform.

### **Authorities take aim at leading Ecuadorian media freedom NGO**

Ecuadorian media freedom group Fundamedios is [facing
closure](http://bigstory.ap.org/urn:publicid:ap.org:248713683012426c94b3842cc685abee)
over allegations that it has become politically partisan. Ecuador’s
Communications Secretariat has begun proceedings to shut down the NGO, giving
the group ten days to defend itself before a final ruling. Ecuadorian
President Rafael Correa has been engaged in a [battle with media
critics](https://advocacy.globalvoicesonline.org/2014/10/08/netizen-report-
rafael-correas-crusade-against-critical-media-online-and-off/) over the past
several years, and in 2013 passed a restrictive [Communications
Law](https://advocacy.globalvoicesonline.org/2013/07/22/mechanisms-of-
censorship-in-ecuadors-communications-law/) deemed by many to be the most
draconian in the region. “Not content with persecuting, harassing, fining and
verbally abusing critics in the privately owned press, the Ecuadorian
government is now threatening to dissolve the leading press freedom
organization”, said the [Committee to Protect Journalists’ Carlos
Lauria](https://cpj.org/2015/09/press-freedom-group-fundamedios-fears-closure-
over.php) in response to the news.

### **Iranian Facebook user gets seven years in jail, but no due process**

Iranian Facebook activist Shahsavandi Shirazi was among eight Facebook
activists arrested in 2013. In 2014, Shirazi was convicted of insultingt he
Supreme Leader Khamenei and late founder of the Islamic Republic Ayatollah
Khomeini, conspiring against the state, and publishing pornographic images.
Last week Shirazi told the [International Campaign for Human Rights in
Iran](https://advocacy.globalvoicesonline.org/2015/09/08/facebook-activist-
details-how-she-received-a-seven-year-prison-sentence-in-iran/) that in
judicial proceedings she was denied access to a lawyer, interrogated about
private matters and charged with crimes she never committed. Shirazi says the
pages she managed on the social networking site were non-political and closer
in nature to citizen journalism.

### **Thai journalist detained for “disturbing peace and order” on social
media**

Veteran journalist Pravit Rojanapruk was [detained by the Thai
army](https://advocacy.globalvoicesonline.org/2015/09/15/veteran-thai-
journalist-detained-after-attitude-adjustment/) for allegedly posting
information online that “disturbed peace and order”. This is the second time
Pravit, a senior reporter for the leading English-language daily The Nation,
has been detained by authorities in Thailand.

### **Austrian Parliament proposes new state surveillance regime**

In mid-October the Austrian parliament will vote on the controversial
“Staatsschutzgesetz,” or State Protection Act, which would[ establish ten new
surveillance agencies](http://arstechnica.co.uk/tech-policy/2015/09/austria-
plans-ten-new-spy-agencies-with-vast-surveillance-powers/) (one federal, nine
provincial) and grant them far-reaching powers to monitor citizens with little
judicial oversight. The law dictates that all data collected through the
program must be kept for a minimum of five years in a central database. The
law also[ explicitly encourages](https://edri.org/austria-creates-new-agency-
with-unprecedented-surveillance-powers/) cooperation with foreign intelligence
agencies. The legislation was drafted following terrorist attacks in Paris and
Copenhagen earlier this year, and is attracting vehement criticism from many
Austrian institutions, as well as the public. [An online petition against the
Staatsschutzgesetz](https://www.staatsschutz.at/), organized by Austrian
privacy group AK Vorrat, has already garnered over 12,000 signatures.

### **Onion router wins support from bookworms, geeks**

Libraries have [long
been](http://www.slate.com/blogs/future_tense/2015/06/03/usa_freedom_act_before_snowden_librarians_were_the_anti_surveillance_heroes.html)
ardent supporters of free access to information and privacy, and have at times
stood to defend their patrons’ rights to protecting the privacy of their
reading habits. That battle [took on new
form](https://www.propublica.org/article/library-support-anonymous-internet-
browsing-effort-stops-after-dhs-email) recently, when a library in the US
state of New Hampshire, the first in the world to participate in the anonymous
web browsing network Tor and allow patrons to use the networks via its relay
technology, were contacted by the Department of Homeland Security through
their local police department. Following a meeting between local police and
city officials, the library consulted its board of trustees on the matter. The
library trustees agreed to reinstate its participation with Tor.

The Internet Engineering Task Force and Internet Assigned Numbers Authority
[granted .onion websites “Special Use Domain” status](http://gizmodo.com/the-
dark-web-just-got-safer-1729830673), enabling administrators for sites on Tor
Hidden Services to apply for SSL and TLS certificates. The move should result
in a substantial improvement in the security of .onion websites.

### **Cool Things**

The Washington Post released a new video series, [“Global Threats to a Free
Press,”](http://www.washingtonpost.com/video/national/intro-global-threats-to-
press-freedom/2015/09/10/31dad30c-580c-11e5-9f54-1ea23f6e02f3_video.html)
which includes video testimony from thirty journalists, bloggers,
photographers and activists worldwide who have faced direct threats because of
their work. Global Voices authors Endalk Chala (Ethiopia) and Ali Abdulemam
(Bahrain) are among those featured.

_[Juan Arellano](https://globalvoicesonline.org/author/juan-arellano/), [Mary
Aviles](https://globalvoicesonline.org/author/mary-aviles/), [Ellery Roberts
Biddle](https://advocacy.globalvoicesonline.org/author/ellery-roberts-
biddle/), Sam Kellogg, Hae-in Lim and[ Sarah Myers
West](https://advocacy.globalvoicesonline.org/author/sarahbmyers/) contributed
to this report._

### [**Subscribe to the Netizen Report by email**](http://eepurl.com/Y-f11)

