_**This post is part of our special coverage[Europe in
Crisis](https://globalvoicesonline.org/specialcoverage/europe-in-crisis/).**_

_[All links lead to Spanish-language websites unless otherwise noted]_

Since the start of the economic crisis, the Spanish government has not taken
the necessary measures to foment growth or create jobs. On the contrary, they
have made multiple cuts to the budget that put at risk entire social groups
and endanger the rights of the citizenry. This has aggravated the situation of
countries that are already on the brink of bankruptcy.

Faced with these conditions, people feel that it is up to them to take control
of their future, and in Spain, where encouraging trends continue to arise,
Spaniards have done just that. Many have opted to create viable alternatives
to their economy in crisis, such as networks for sharing goods and services or
new systems and currencies that promote responsible consumption.

**Sharing to save**

One of the consequences of the crisis has been the spread of poverty into the
middle class and the worsening of conditions for the most vulnerable members
of society, so much so that [a recent United Nations
report](http://www.lavozdegalicia.es/noticia/economia/2012/07/30/onu-acusa-
rajoy-llevar-pobreza-218-espanolesjuncker-anuncia-bce-eurogrupo-actuaran-
juntos-salvar-espana-italia/0003_201207G30P18991.htm) on Spain denounced the
trend. As a result, the sharing and exchanging of goods has become the most
supportive and economic option for a number of Spaniards. Before the start of
the crisis, some of these systems already existed, but only now have they
taken on more importance.

So that traveling doesn't become a luxury, a usual practice is to [ride
share](http://www.blablacar.es/) in order to save money during trips. In this
way, people who don't know each other but who are going in the same direction
all travel in one vehicle and share the cost of gasoline. Similarly, there is
a collective taxi service in which the cost of a trip is divided among the
greatest number of people possible. Also, when traveling abroad some use
[couch-surfing](http://www.couchsurfing.org/) in order to enjoy more
economical accommodation.

The rise in value-added tax from 18 to 21 percent in Spain, which was not
included in President Mariano Rajoy's campaign platform, has made life even
more expensive and dealt a hard blow to people's wallets. The hike went into
effect in September, the month in which students go back to school and
families go shopping for school materials.

Various groups have mobilized in force to coordinate donations of school
supplies, among them neighborhood assemblies and the 15M movement. When it
comes to books, web pages such as
[Libroscompartidos.com](http://libroscompartidos.com/) (Shared Books) allow
users from different corners of the country to exchange books not for profit
and even manages delivery service and collection of the material.

[![Textbook exchange in Móstoles \(Madrid\) on September 16, 2012. Photo by
Fotogracción.](https://es.globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2012/09/trueque-de-
libros-375x250.jpg)](http://fotograccion.org/)

Textbook exchange in Móstoles (Madrid) on September 16, 2012. Photo by
Fotogracción.

**Promoting responsible consumption**

New technologies, especially the Internet, allow for the creation of
constructive ideas as well as online alternative communities.
[Etruekko](http://www.etruekko.com/), in the midst of the discontent and
protest in Spain, has done just that by attempting to broadcast a positive
message and construct a different model of society.

It is [a social network of virtual
communities](http://es.slideshare.net/etruekko/etruekko-tu-red-de-
intercambio-13910709), still under development, which promotes social
responsibility and offers a social currency called truekko which is earned
through the exchange of goods and services. In this way, a person can become
empowered, consume responsibly, and help disseminate ethical values on the
web, even if they aren't very skilled at using new technologies.

The blog [Konsumo responsable](http://www.konsumoresponsable.coop/mercado-
social-madrid/como-funciona-la-moneda-social) (Responsible Consumption)
published the following definition of a “social market”:

> El Mercado Social implementa un circuito de moneda complementaria que basa
> una parte de su funcionamiento en bonificaciones aplicadas a los
> consumidores con cada compra, y que para el proveedor supone un descuento en
> la venta. Es algo parecido a los programas de puntos que tienen algunas
> empresas grandes para fidelizar clientes y aumentar ventas, pero con el
> objetivo de ampliar la incidencia de la economía solidaria y desarrollar
> redes amplias que puedan funcionar con una “moneda” basada en criterios
> económicos no capitalistas.

The Social Market implements a complementary currency that works in part
thanks to bonuses awarded to the consumers with each purchase, and for the
seller, that means a discount on the sale. Its something similar to the points
programs that some large companies use to cultivate the loyalty of clients and
increase sales, but with the objective of increasing the impact of a
supportive economy and developing wide networks that can serve as “currency”
based on non capitalistic economic criteria.

[Occupied and self-managed community
centers](http://www.letra.org/spip/spip.php?article4137) have a role in this
dynamic. In Madrid, the Tabacalera, the Patio Maravillas and the Casablanca
centers stand out. The centers, which began with the peaceful occupation of an
unused building, are organized spaces open to the public which offer a variety
of cultural and leisure activities.

They require constant organization from the groups and associations that
frequent the centers, and they have successfully carved out a place for
themselves in the community. The centers also usually offer activities and
talks about various topics: dance and music workshops, concerts, expositions,
free clothing, and meeting areas.

In a city, those who participate in [urban gardens and gardening
collectives](http://www.npr.org/2012/03/18/148772505/after-spains-
construction-bust-gardens-bloom) [en], growing various foods on unused pieces
of land and lots, greatly promote critical discussion among people about the
economic model to which they belong and possible ethical solutions to the
current market. Consumer groups and collectives advocate for the purchase of
sustainable food products while at the same time refusing to participate in
the abuse committed against small farmers by large supply chains.

![Urban garden planted in the Puerta del Sol by members of the Spanish
indignado movement in May 2011. Photo by Lecamaleon
\(cc\).](https://es.globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2012/09/huerto31-375x267.jpg)

Urban garden planted in the Puerta del Sol by members of the Spanish indignado
movement in May 2011. Photo by Lecamaleon (cc).

[![Eviction of the occupied community center, Casablanca, September 19, 2012,
in Madrid. Neighbors went out and protested after the police intervention.
Published on 15Mpedia](https://es.globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2012/09/Desalojo-del-centro-
social-300x300.jpg)](http://wiki.15m.cc/wiki/Portada)

Eviction of the occupied community center, Casablanca, September 19, 2012, in
Madrid. Neighbors went out and protested after the police intervention.
Published on 15Mpedia

Despite the obstacles in creating another system capable of competing with the
current market, there are more and more people who are adhering to economic
philosophies that are ethical, promote social responsibility, and are self-
managed, while questioning the existing capitalistic model through reflection
and gestures of solidarity. This sends a clear message to society and those in
power: another world is possible.

_**This post is part of our special coverage[Europe in
Crisis](https://globalvoicesonline.org/specialcoverage/europe-in-crisis/).**_

