A gas tank [exploded](http://www.eluniversal.com/economia/120825/blast-at-
venezuelas-major-oil-refinery-amuay) at 1 am today, August 25, in the Amuay
refinery in Judibana, Falcón state. The explosion has left [at
least](http://www.washingtonpost.com/business/refinery-explosion-in-venezuela-
leaves-at-least-7-dead-dozens-injured-state-governor-
says/2012/08/25/1c54ca7c-ee99-11e1-b624-99dee49d8d67_story.html) 26 dead
(media from Falcón report 35 deaths) and 86 injured. Most of the casualties
are members of the National Bolivarian Guard. Amuay is Venezuela's most
important refinery, and one of the five largest oil refineries in the world.

The reasons behind this accident are still unclear.

Gabriela Gonzalez [(@gabriela2400](https://twitter.com/gabriela2400/)) [es], a
doctor and neighbour living in the area, told Venezuelan journalist Nelson
Bocaranda that the refinery's alarm system was activated half an hour before
the accident and then turned off.

>
> ([@gabriela2400](https://twitter.com/gabriela2400/status/239380521338142720)):
> [@NelsonBocaranda](https://twitter.com/NelsonBocaranda) Las alarmas
> empezaron a sonar a las 12:30 y al poco rato las apagaron.

([@gabriela2400](https://twitter.com/gabriela2400/status/239380521338142720))
[es]: [@NelsonBocaranda](https://twitter.com/NelsonBocaranda) Alarms went off
at 12:30 and were quickly turned off.

Vice-President Elías Jaua and [Petróleos de
Venezuela](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Petr%C3%B3leos_de_Venezuela) (Pdvsa)
President, Rafael Ramírez, are currently in Amuay. [They
stated](http://www.eluniversal.com/nacional-y-politica/120825/declaraciones-
de-rafael-ramirez-y-elias-jaua-tras-explosion-en-amuay) [es] that authorities
will work in the refinery until the fire is extinguished, and that the smoke
reported by citizens is part of the firemen's labours to control the
situation. Furthermore, they assured that the Government will assume full
responsibility for damages.

The photos and videos circulating online show a zone that seems to have been
affected by an earthquake rather than an explosion. [Noticias
24](http://www.noticias24.com/fotos/noticia/1487/la-tragedia-de-amuay-vista-
por-las-imagenes-exclusivas-del-fotografo-hector-silva/) [es] gathered photos
by photographer Héctor Silva, one of the people present in Amuay since the
beginning of the tragedy.

Several citizen videos of the explosion are being shared on YouTube:

Newspaper La Verdad ([@laverdadweb](https://twitter.com/laverdadweb)) [es]
[reported](https://twitter.com/laverdadweb/status/239399765845098498) [es]
that propane gas smell is present in the area round the refinery; the odour is
similar to the smell of tear gas.

José Luis Cova R ([@JLCova](http://twitter.com/JLCova/)) [es] commented on
Twitter:

> [@JLCova](http://twitter.com/JLCova/status/239394103060729857): El radio de
> accion de la explosion d las esferas d propano es devastador.. La entrada a
> Judibana y todo alrededor esta Destruida

[@JLCova ](http://twitter.com/JLCova/status/239394103060729857)[es]: The
action radius for the propane spheres explosion is devastating. The entrance
to Judibana and everything surrounding it is destroyed.

He also reports that a food and alcoholic beverage store, known in Venezuela
as _bodegones_ , was looted:

>
> [@JLCova](https://twitter.com/JLCova/status/239400361859895296)[:](https://twitter.com/JLCova/status/239400361859895296)
> El bodegon Lizolca a la entrada de judibana Fue Saqueado!

[@JLCova](https://twitter.com/JLCova/status/239400361859895296) [es]: The
Lizolca bodegon at the entrance of Judibana was looted!

Most of the people injured in the explosion were taken to the Calles Sierra
Hospital, which doesn't have enough supplies, as reported by Gabriela Gonzalez
[(@gabriela2400](http://twitter.com/gabriela2400/)) [es]:

> [@gabriela2400](http://twitter.com/gabriela2400/status/239376754156900353):
> Hospital Calles Sierra Necesita: antibióticos, plasma, sangre, analgésicos,
> morfina, demerol, gasas, ringer, sol fisiológica.

[@gabriela2400](http://twitter.com/gabriela2400/status/239376754156900353)
[es]: Calles Sierra Hospital needs: antibiotics, plasma, blood, analgesics,
morphine, demerol, gauze, ringer's lactate solution, saline solution.

President Hugo Chávez has [declared](http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/world-latin-
america-19378657) three days of national mourning for the victims at Amuay.

