“Don Quijote felt he needed to defend himself from giants. I need to protect
my family from these giants that are being installed in a densely populated
area. Not only are they feet away from [our] homes but they are in fertile
grounds used for agriculture,” wrote Puerto Rican blogger Raúl Colón on a post
titled [“Don Quijote, “Molinos”, Health Risks, & Santa
Isabel”](http://raulcolon.net/molinos-santa-isabel/) [es] this past May. A
resident of Santa Isabel, a southern coastal municipality in Puerto Rico, Raúl
is concerned about the health risks related to having 44 wind turbines
installed near his home.

The project “Finca de Viento Santa Isabel” (Santa Isabel Wind Farm), of the
San Francisco, California, company [Pattern
Energy](http://www.santaisabelwind.com/), is [one of
several](http://www.miprv.com/turbina-eolica-proveera-energia-a-planta-de-
tratamiento-de-la-aaa-en-san-juan/) [es] multi-million dollar renewable-energy
projects projected to begin production this year on the island – and once
completed it will be the largest of its kind in the Caribbean. The company
states on its [website](http://www.santaisabelwind.com/) that it expects “to
provide clean, safe and renewable energy equal to the annual power needs of
about 25,000 homes.” However, as the first turbines were being raised during
the last weeks of May, some of Santa Isabel's 21,000+ residents such as Raúl
began having second thoughts about the project and its proximity to their
homes.

Concerned activist groups such as the [Frente de Rescate Agrícola
(FRA)](http://frapuertorico.wordpress.com/) [es] (Agriculture Rescue Front)
have raised awareness about Pattern Energy's Santa Isabel wind farm
[claiming](https://docs.google.com/file/d/0B8WPvg4yLaOPVlRUSlVCbEduMUE/edit)
[es] the project will have a adverse effects on the municipality's
agricultural industry and its residents’ health – without the promised benefit
of reduced energy costs. The Puerto Rico Farmers Association President Ramón
González blasted the project, [stating to the
press](http://www.caribbeanbusiness.pr/news03.php?nt_id=63517&ct_id=1): “What
is happening in this case is troubling. They are sacrificing 3,000 acres of
some of the island’s best farmland.” Several members of the FRA [where
arrested late last
year](http://www.prdailysun.com/index.php?page=news.article&id=1324692284)
while protesting at the site.

This is not the first time that Pattern Energy has encountered resistance from
concerned citizens; a similar project in [Ocotillo
Wells](http://eastcountymagazine.org/node/9173) in San Diego County,
California has also met with opposition. Meanwhile, residents from Falmouth,
Massachusetts have begun speaking out about [how noisy turbines have affected
their health](http://www.capenews.net/communities/falmouth/news/1870), leading
to the [temporary shutdown of that
project](http://www.earthtechling.com/2012/05/noisy-wind-turbine-faces-
shutdown-in-massachusetts/).

Back in Puerto Rico, residents of the municipality of Guayanilla [recently
reported suspicious smoke](http://www.telemundopr.com/videos/Alarmados-
vecinos-de-Guayanilla-por-grieta-humeante-155755955.html) [es] emanating from
the cracked soils at another wind farm development project. [The troubled
project](http://www.wind-watch.org/news/2011/03/23/windmar-complicidad-y-
crimen-ambiental-en-guayanilla/) [es], by Windmar Renewal Energy, has resulted
in what many consider [an ecological
disaster](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=bWkA3L1hoAI) [es].

Below, a humorous tour of Pattern Energy's Santa Isabel facility by Puerto
Rican independent musician and artist Fernando Castro Álvarez. The video
features the character of “El obrero Curet”, a worker more than happy to risk
his life and well-being in the name of “progress,” and was produced as part of
Fernando's audio-visual project, [La Avanzada
Y](http://www.youtube.com/user/Laavanzaday?feature=watch).

Thumbnail image of a wind turbine in the Isle of Lewis, taken from
http://www.uhi.ac.uk/sustainable's Flickr account under [CC License
BY-2.0.](https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0/deed.en)

