In Kenya, city dwellers are learning different techniques to grow food for
consumption and sale even in reduced spaces. For people with low or no income,
urban gardening may be the key to food security. These videos show how food
can be grown in containers and using limited space and resources.

From the Mammut Film Production documentary [_God save the
green_](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=yo9I4zexUfg "God Save the Green") by
Michele Mellara and Alessandro Rossi comes this short segment on the bag
gardens that are enabling urban gardeners in Nairobi to grow enough leafy
greens for a family of six on one square meter, by going vertical:

[_Be a Blessing Today_
](http://www.youtube.com/user/Beablessingtoday?feature=watch "Be a Blessing
Today YouTube Channel")has uploaded a series of videos that teach different
urban farming techniques from his garden in Kenya. One of the is the
previously seen [bag method](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ezoCxMsMZ88 "Bag
method"), with certain improvements that make watering easier:

Two other methods taught by Be a Blessing are the [raised bed
walls](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=GNdInHRt0Q4 "raised bed walls") and
[stairway farming](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=x0djlwKOWQs "stairway
farming boxes video"), both ways to readapt spaces for easier gardening, by
creating raised beds that don't require bending down to harvest and plant, and
by enabling planting over concrete areas.

Other techniques which are useful for people growing food in limited spaces
are shared by other people on YouTube from different parts of the world. For
example, this is a great way to use up discarded plastic water bottles to grow
food on a vertical garden:

[This one ](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Q2OVIXK6TwI "upside down cucumber
planter")grows plants both on the top and bottom from a plastic container made
from a discarded large water bottle:

This other [video](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=f162GR7LPi4 "tire container
garden") shows us ways in which discarded tires can also be used as containers
for gardens:

Seedling image is by [Chrisseee on
Flickr](http://www.flickr.com/photos/chrisseee/4465433814/in/photostream/
"Chrisseee on Flickr"), with a [Creative Commons Attribution
License](http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0/deed.en "CCBY").

