With a GDP per capita estimated at just $5,400 in 2011, Armenia is one of the
poorest countries in the former Soviet Union. But although development in the
center of the country's capital, Yerevan, might paint a different picture for
some tourists, especially from its large Diaspora, the economic situation is
most evident in the regions of the landlocked South Caucasus country.

With regional development increasingly a priority in Armenia, online site
[CivilNet](http://civilnet.am/) has teamed up with Timothy Straight, one of
Armenia's few non-Armenian foreigners who have made the country their home.
Traveling to a different village each week, the former head of the Norwegian
Refugee Council and the Honorary Consul for Norway and Finland, [hopes to
change all
that](http://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PL1427F6C8D0471BA6&feature=plcp).

![](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2012/04/tim_straight1.jpg)

“What we're trying to do is gather information and spread it, so that people
can get correct understanding of what village life in Armenia is like,”
explains the text accompanying a promotional video for Թիմը գնում է գյուղ (Tim
goes to the village), otherwise known as Straight to the village.

The first episode went online on 20 September last year and takes a look at
two villages close to the border with Turkey whose income is based on fruit
production.

In the latest installment uploaded to YouTube on 2 April, and subtitled in
English and Armenian, Straight travels to the impoverished town of Vardenis
close to Armenia's Lake Sevan. The purpose of the visit is to meet with a
local NGO working with disabled children.

On 12 March, the program celebrated its 20th episode [with an interview with
Straight](http://civilnet.am/3169) where he “talks about some of the
highlights and explains the reason why he does the program and the potential
long-term effect of the show.”

Knighted by the King of Norway in 2010, Straight's involvement in regional
development in Armenia is not limited to the video reports. [Homeland
Handicrafts](http://www.homelandhandicrafts.org/), for example, is a voluntary
organization dedicated to [creating a sustainable income for
artisans](http://asbarez.com/90920/supporting-and-sustaining-armenias-
artisans/) in Armenia.

[![](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2012/04/homeland_handicrafts.jpg)](http://www.homelandhandicrafts.org/)

Particularly using online tools, a [blog](http://homeland-
handicrafts.blogspot.com/) as well as
[Facebook](https://www.facebook.com/pages/Homeland-
Handicrafts/224555134224123) and
[Pinterest](http://pinterest.com/homelandcrafts/berd-bears/) pages are also
used to promote the initiative. Timothy Straight can also be followed on
Twitter at [@timothystraight](https://twitter.com/#!/timothystraight).

