Rising Voices is pleased to announce the six newest members to join its global
community of citizen media grantees. Each of the selected projects will
receive microgrants to implement their proposed project to teach others how to
use various citizen media tools. This latest competition round resulted in an
impressive amount of interest from around the world. In all, Rising Voices
received more than 1178 applications from more than 122 countries, and it was
a difficult decision narrowing down the selection to just six grantee
projects. There were many deserving projects with great ideas that addressed
specific needs in local underrepresented communities that we were
unfortunately unable to fund. The six projects selected are diverse in their
approach, with each working in their unique context and we think will add much
to our community.

**Guatemala: Citizen Participation in Rural Libraries**

Community libraries have been playing an important role in daily life across
rural Central American communities by offering access to books and other
resources to help encourage reading habits and other opportunities for
learning. However, there has been a global trend to rethink the traditional
function of these libraries by transforming them into spaces that can help
foster greater citizen participation. This reflection is also taking place in
Guatemala, as libraries affiliated with the [Riecken regional network of
libraries](http://www.riecken.org) are prime locations to explore these new
civic possibilities.

[![](https://rising.globalvoicesonline.org/files/2012/03/library.jpg)](http://www.flickr.com/photos/carlosoliveirareis/5757994428/)

Guatemalan rural library. Photo by Carlos Reis and used under a (CC BY-NC-SA
2.0) license.

Three rural libraries located in the villages of Huitán, San Carlos Sija,
Cabricán in the [Quetzaltenango
Department](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Quetzaltenango_Department) of
Guatemala will launch a project in partnership with the Guatemalan NGO [Acción
Ciudadana](http://www.accionciudadana.org.gt/) (Citizen Action), an
organization that helps advocate for greater citizen participation and
transparency in the public sector. Now that the [Guatemalan Congress passed
the Law for Free Access to Public Information and has pledged to join the Open
Government Partnership](http://www.freedominfo.org/regions/latin-
america/guatemala/), there is a huge opportunity for all, but access and
training are necessary to ensure that these initiatives will benefit rural
communities.

Now that many of these rural libraries in Guatemala are connected to the
internet, the trainers from Acción Ciudadana will help guide these communities
how they can best take full advantage of these access to information policies.
The project will also provide citizen media training to users of these three
libraries so that they can tell the stories of some of the ongoing problems
facing their communities and document the process how they can request
information that may potentially solve these issues. All of the information
will be uploaded to the library's blog and be a model for dozens of other
rural libraries within this network.

**United States: Powhatan Language Revitalization Project**

In the 2005 movie “[The New
World](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_New_World_\(film\)),” which depicted
the 17th century founding of the Jamestown Settlement in the U.S. state of
Virginia, the filmmakers ran into a problem finding speakers of the Native
American language spoken from that era. Turned out that the [Powhatan
](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Powhatan_language) or Virginia Algonquian
language had been extinct for more than two centuries. Based on some early
academic work and an existing list of vocabulary words, [linguists attempted
to piece together the language
](http://www.msnbc.msn.com/id/10950199#.T3SqBeyXRi8)in order to resemble the
actual language as closely as possible for the purposes of the film.

![](https://rising.globalvoicesonline.org/files/2012/03/powhatan.jpg)One of
the major reasons why this language died out is that for many years it was
forbidden by law, but lately there has been a resurgence and greater interest
in revitalizing this language. The work done for the Hollywood film is only
one small step in this process. Enter [Ian
Custalow](http://www.custalow.com/), a member of the Mattaponi Tribe, who has
been working toward the ambitious goal of bringing this language back from
extinction into an endangered status. He has been building upon the foundation
of documentation work, and may be one of the most active speakers of this
language. To help develop more speakers, he has been offering language classes
to students of all ages from member tribes of the Powhatan Confederacy through
regular visits to the various communities throughout the state.

Now he wants to see how citizen media and other technology can help complement
these classes, as a way to attain the community's goal of revitalizing this
language. In addition to creating electronic dictionaries and keyboards for
smartphones and computers, he believes that [citizen media and other social
networking tools can be a great motivator and way to connect new learners of
this language](http://www.newtactics.org/en/dialogue/using-citizen-media-
tools-promote-under-represented-languages) across the various tribes, such as
the Mattaponi, Pamunkey, Upper Mattaponi, Patawomeck, Rappahannock,
Chickahominy, Eastern Chickahominy and Nansemond. The hope is, according to
Custalow, that “the project will allow for the language of a suppressed and
underrepresented Native American community to live once again.”

**Paraguay: Aché Digital Community**

The [Aché indigenous people](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ach%C3%A9_people) in
Paraguay has had a challenging past and present with much of this difficult
history stemming from land rights issues. During the 20th century, the Aché
[suffered through a tragic
genocide](http://books.google.com.bo/books/about/The_Ach%C3%A9_Indians_genocide_in_Paraguay.html?id=xN4rAAAAYAAJ&redir_esc=y),
and went through a targeted removal from their lands, which resulted in
thousands of deaths, refugees, and kidnappings that dwindled their population
to only 350. However, they have been slowly rebuilding and continuing their
struggles to protect their territory. Now totaling approximately 1500 members
across six communities in Northern and Eastern Paraguay, their rich history
and culture often is overshadowed by these dark days in the Ache's recent
history.

For the past five years, Tamara Migelson and other local multimedia artists,
filmmakers, and designers have been accompanying these Aché communities by
documenting their daily way of life and traditional customs. They helped
establish the Center of Culture and Communication, which has produced a series
of documentary films, books, and [photography
exhibits](http://www.flickr.com/photos/achedjawu/sets/72157626804395424/) that
has [helped show a different side of the Aché people to the rest of the
country](http://www.facebook.com/media/set/?set=a.1845249732851.2093776.1288878729&type=3&l=77b8adeba6).
Members of these communities took a great interest in telling their own
stories, and now with the availability of internet in each of the six
communities: Chupa Pou, Kuetuvy, Arroyo Bandera, Ypetimi, Puerto Barra, and
Cerro Morotí, there is an opportunity for the Aché to take a more
participatory role in producing this material for a national, regional, and
global audience.

[![](https://rising.globalvoicesonline.org/files/2012/03/5758491349_141e3b6c2f.jpg)](http://www.flickr.com/photos/achedjawu/5758491349/in/set-72157626804395424/)

Puerto Barra Community – Photo by Francisco Kandegi

The project will identify several young people from each of the six
communities to take part in intensive skills-building workshops in the use of
blogs, digital photography and video, as well as social networking. The
workshops will take place in the capital city of
[Asunción](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Asunci%C3%B3n), and the hope is that
these young people will eventually become local resources for others when they
return home. They will tell the stories of their communities, record stories
from their elders, and provide news about some of the ongoing social
challenges facing their people. In addition to being able to communicate with
a wider audience through digital media, these six communities will also be
able to connect with one another despite being separated by hundreds of
kilometers in order to share their struggles and celebrate their successes.

**Palestine: Food Tales from Nablus**

In the heart of the Old City of [Nablus](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Nablus)
in Palestine, a new women's center called [Bait al
Karama](http://baitalkarama.org) opened fall of 2011, as a result of a unique
partnership between Fatima Kadoumy, representative of a local women's affairs
charity Fatima Kadoumy and visual artist Beatrice Catanzaroto. The center has
been providing art and cultural opportunities for local women, who live in and
around this neighborhood. However, the primary focus of the center is to
provide opportunities through culinary social enterprises. One of the major
components will be the creation a cooking school for foreign visitors that
will employ local women as chefs and instructors.

The reason why food plays a major role in the center is because of so much of
daily life in Palestine is centered around food, leading to greater fellowship
amongst residents. As Catanzaro wrote in the application, “Conviviality
represents a fundamental space of the life of Palestinian women and social
life as a whole, even in times of bombardments and curfews.” Many of the women
involved with the center have been living through the realities of occupation,
including economic or personal hardships. Some of the women are widows,
victims of domestic violence, or whose husbands are in prison. But through the
close-knit connection with Bait al Karama, the women are able to participate
more fully in the creation of a new future for themselves and their families

Using food as the starting point, the project seeks to teach local women how
to use citizen media to document and record personal and family stories about
the origins and the traditions of local cuisine. These narratives will provide
an important window to better understand the lives of the women and their
families through their own words. The stories and images will be fully
incorporated into Bait al Karama's blog. Catanazaro adds, “the women will be
recalling personal and family memories and will depict a culture and tradition
far beyond the usual stereotype of a conflict country.”

**Peru: Llaqtaypa Riymaynin**

It is a situation that is all too common all across Peru. Residents from rural
towns migrate to larger cities to find better educational and employment
opportunities. In the case of residents from the [Haquira
District](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Haquira_District) of
[Apurimac](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Apur%C3%ADmac_Region), Peru, the
[internal armed conflict](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Armed_conflict_Peru)
also contributed heavily to this steady stream of migrants that left their
hometowns. Adapting to a new way of life can often take a heavy toll on local
customs and traditions. While the approximately 1,000 local residents from
this region, who now live in the capital city of Lima, have made the effort to
preserve some of these customs, such as replicating traditional festivals and
maintaing the practice of communal labor, sustaining their native language of
Quechua in an urban setting has not been as successful.

The project Llaqtaypa Riymaynin (Voices of my Community) led by [Irma Alvarez
Ccoscco](http://www.sankaypillo.com/) aims to use technology and citizen media
to revitalize the language in this urban community. As she wrote in her
application, “I have learned that the Quechua language is of vital importance
to its speakers in urban context because it is a way to sustainable identity.”
Alvarez, in addition to tirelessly working with the [translation of free
software applications into the Quechua language](http://www.runasimipi.org/),
was one of the creators of the [Hablemos Quechua (@hablemosquechua) Twitter
account](https://rising.globalvoicesonline.org/blog/2011/11/01/languages-lets-
tweet-in-quechua/).

In partnership with [Escuelab](http://escuelab.org/), a technology and
collaborative learning center in Lima, the project will identify young people
from these communities, who have an interest in strengthening their ties with
the Quechua language through the use of participatory media. Through the use
of the free software [Audacity](http://audacity.sourceforge.net/), a free and
open-source digital audio editor and recording application, the participants
will record programs and short stories in the Quechua language. These podcasts
will be uploaded online, as well as shared with community radio stations
serving this community.

An eventual goal is to return to these villages with examples of this effort
to revitalize the language despite living hundreds of kilometers away. Alvarez
adds that the hope is that “the migrants would find their identity and first
language in ICT mediums and what could be better than facilitating them to
speak for themselves.”

**Burma: Karen Language Podcasts on the Border**

The Karen state is cautiously emerging from six decades of civil war,
following a ceasefire agreement between the Burmese government and the [Karen
National Union](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Karen_National_Union). In
addition to monitoring the complicated human rights situation along the
Burma/Thailand border, citizen journalists in Karen State are a crucial link
for their local offline community to gain a basic understanding of the
tentative ceasefire agreement, the terms of which are currently being viewed
with much skepticism by the [Karen
community](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Karen_people).

![](https://rising.globalvoicesonline.org/files/2012/03/ksng.jpg)The [Karen
Student Network Group](http://ksngmedia.blogspot.com/) has been responsible
for the only regular Karen Language news broadcasts (currently broadcasting on
low-power FM radio in 5 refugee camps on the Thai-Burma border). KSNG's weekly
radio program provides news, education, information, and entertainment for at
least 30,000 refugee listeners in these camps. In addition to producing weekly
radio broadcasts, KSNG also helps find educational opportunities for students,
produces health and other relevant drama programs, and conducts leadership and
management trainings.

This project will expand this news service by training citizen journalists to
use podcasts in order to connect the voices of internally displaced Karen
speaking people with the Karen community living as refugees in Thailand, as
well as the increasing diaspora of resettled Karen refugees living in Canada,
Australia, US and UK. By making this information on these topics available,
both locally and online, the project hopes to keep the Karen community, who
are rapidly being resettled to foreign countries, connected to their cultural
and historical homeland.

**Please join us in congratulating and welcoming the six newest Rising Voices
grantees.**

