At Global Voices, we understand that we, collectively, are the Internet. Our
individual participation is what makes the Internet a global conversation of
startling depth and variety, but this is possible only because of its open
technical and legal structure. Unfortunately, there are powerful corporate and
government forces who would prefer to see the openness and accessibility of
the web restricted. They seek to deploy censorship and surveillance in the
name of enforcing copyright, employing the very tools used to censor the
Internet in authoritarian countries, such as China, Iran, and Syria.

Ignoring the warnings of citizens and technologists, United States lawmakers
are considering two bills, the [Stop Online Piracy Act
(SOPA)](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Stop_Online_Piracy_Act) and the [Protect
IP Act (PIPA)](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/PROTECT_IP_Act), that are a real
and dangerous threat to the openness of the web everywhere in the world. In
response, the Global Voices community has decided to join websites such as
[Wikipedia](http://wikimediafoundation.org/wiki/English_Wikipedia_anti-
SOPA_blackout), [Reddit](http://blog.reddit.com/2012/01/stopped-they-must-be-
on-this-all.html) and [BoingBoing](http://boingboing.net/2012/01/14/boing-
boing-will-go-dark-on-ja.html) in “going dark” and will black out the [Global
Voices Advocacy](https://advocacy.globalvoicesonline.org/) site for 12 hours
on January 18, and display a banner on other Global Voices sites that provides
more information about the proposed bills.

![Stop SOPA/PIPA](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2012/01/StopSOPA_NewLogo_SOPA_PIPA.jpg)

We are an international volunteer community dedicated to amplifying citizen
media from around the world. In the last six years, we’ve produced more than
75,000 posts that link to blogs and other citizen content for readers in over
20 languages. Our content is free to use, and free to share. We rely on the
open Internet to carry out our mission, and on social media and citizen media
websites that allow for simple publication and sharing of content. Platforms
like WordPress, Wikipedia, Twitter, YouTube, Flickr, Reddit, Tumblr, and many
other online media production communities host content on which we base much
of our work.

The passage of SOPA and PIPA by the United States Congress and Senate would
force social media platforms and other web sites that host user-generated
content to _pro-actively_ monitor and censor users to prevent them from
posting words or images that may violate copyrights. It would raise the cost
of participation on these sites for all users worldwide, and could force many
social media projects to shut down, especially smaller websites and
businesses.

We are concerned this law would will inflict broad damage on the work of
digital activists living under repressive regimes, as well as restrict basic
speech freedoms around the world. Current copyright laws are occasionally
misused in the U.S, and can result in _de facto_ speech restrictions. In
countries with less independent judicial systems, abuse of copyright law to
repress activism is both simple and frequent.

Global Voices contributors in many countries face increasingly aggressive
surveillance and censorship. Several are in prison or exile because of their
online activities. Passage of these bills will send a clear message that the
US government believes it is acceptable to monitor and censor citizens to
identify “infringing activity” which too often is equated with political and
religious dissent. Passage of SOPA and PIPA would also give the United States
government a disproportionate amount of power to determine the course of the
Internet. The result will be a more dangerous world for bloggers and
activists, and less free speech for all.

Even though the current version of SOPA was[ put indefinitely on hold this
week](http://gigaom.com/2012/01/16/house-shelves-sopa-but-blackout-protests-
continue/), PIPA, the Senate version of the bill, is still alive. And the
[issues and forces](http://boingboing.net/2012/01/10/lockdown.html) that are
driving the passage of a law remain. For this reason, Global Voices is joining
the Internet blackout on January 18, 2012.

**Recent Global Voices Advocacy posts on SOPA/PIPA:**

  * Trevor Tim, [”How PIPA and SOPA Violate White House Principles Supporting Free Speech and Innovation”](https://advocacy.globalvoicesonline.org/2012/01/16/how-pipa-and-sopa-violate-white-house-principles-supporting-free-speech-and-innovation/)
  * Katitza Rodriguez, [“SOPA undermines the U.S. in its negotiations for a free, open Internet”](https://advocacy.globalvoicesonline.org/2011/12/15/sopa-undermines-the-u-s-in-its-negotiations-for-a-free-open-internet/)
  * Weiping Li, [“For Chinese Netizens, SOPA is Another Great Firewall”](https://advocacy.globalvoicesonline.org/2011/12/03/for-chinese-netizens-sopa-is-another-great-firewall/)
  * Yoo Eun Lee, [“Stop Online Piracy Act: The Fight Continues”](https://advocacy.globalvoicesonline.org/2011/11/29/stop-online-piracy-act-fight-continues/)

**Other resources for understanding the effects of SOPA/PIPA:**

  * Joi Ito and Ethan Zuckerman, [“Why we need to stop SOPA and PIPA”](http://joi.ito.com/weblog/2012/01/15/why-we-need-to.html)
  * [“Internet Blacklist Legislation](https://www.eff.org/issues/coica-internet-censorship-and-copyright-bill)“, Electronic Frontier Foundation, [EFF's email campaign against the legislation](https://action.eff.org/o/9042/p/dia/action/public/?action_KEY=8173) and [EFF guide to meeting with your representatives](https://www.eff.org/deeplinks/2012/01/stop-blacklist-legislation-guide-person-meetings). EFF also [explains](https://www.eff.org/deeplinks/2011/11/hollywood-new-war-on-software-freedom-and-internet-innovation) how SOPA/PIPA will hurt open source software creation.
  * Dan Rowinsky, [“What You Need to Know about SOPA in 2012](http://www.readwriteweb.com/archives/what_you_need_to_know_about_sopa_in_2012.php)“, ReadWriteWeb
  * Wikipedia, [“Stop Online Piracy Act”](http://wikimediafoundation.org/wiki/English_Wikipedia_anti-SOPA_blackout)
  * Rebecca MacKinnon and Ivan Sigal, [“Online piracy laws must preserve Web freedom, CNN.”](http://edition.cnn.com/2011/12/14/opinion/sigal-mackinnon-copyright-internet/index.html)

**What you can do:**

  * If you are an American citizen, [Americancensorship.org](http://americancensorship.org/) can help you to quickly communicate with your elected representatives, or help you to join the strike. Learn more about the strike at [www.sopastrike.com](http://www.sopastrike.com/).

