[![Abuja, Nigeria. April 30, 2014. Protesters took to the streets around the
three arms zones of Abuja to demand urgent action from the government in
finding the 200 school girls kidnapped in Chibok. By Ayemoba Godswill. Demotix
\(c\).](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2015/07/4604623-800x533.jpg)](http://www.demotix.com/photo/4604623/protesters-
demand-government-action-finding-200-kidnapped-girls&popup=1)

Abuja, Nigeria. April 30, 2014. Protesters took to the streets around the
three arms zones of Abuja to demand urgent action from the government in
finding the 200 school girls kidnapped in Chibok. By Ayemoba Godswill.
Copyright Demotix.

[Two suicide attacks on June 22 in Maroua](http://www.newsweek.com/two-
suicide-bombings-leave-least-13-dead-cameroon-356147), northern Cameroon, left
several people dead and many others wounded. Ten days earlier, 15 [people were
killed](http://www.bbc.com/news/world-africa-33133511) in a suicide bomb
attack at a crowded market in N'Djamena, the capital of Chad. The attack came
exactly three weeks after a similar bombing [claimed the lives of 27
people](http://bigstory.ap.org/article/15f0637a174b478891019a019f895efb/witnesses-2-suicide-
bombers-attack-chadian-capital) in the same town.

Boko Haram, a Sahel-based jihadist group that recently pledged allegiance to
ISIS, claims responsibility for the attacks. The group struck again a few
weeks after the June attacks, this time in Jos, Nigeria, killing at least 44
people. Boko Haram has repeatedly staged deadly attacks in the Sahel region
for the past several years. In response, a coalition of West African countries
came together to [launch a military
counterstrike](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/2015_West_African_offensive) in
the hope of curbing the group's influence.

Below is a partial timeline of Boko Haram's offensive in 2015, which spread to
Cameroon, Chad, Niger, and Nigeria.

##### The current situation in Cameroon

[![After months of captivity by suspected Boko Haram militants, ex-hostages
arrive at Cameroon's Yaounde Nsimalen International Airport. Pubic Domain via
Wikimedia Commons ](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2015/07/Boko_Haram_hostages_released_Cameroon.jpg)](https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Boko_Haram_hostages_released_VOA.jpg)

After months of captivity by suspected Boko Haram militants, ex-hostages
arrive at Cameroon's Yaounde Nsimalen International Airport. Public Domain via
Wikimedia Commons.

Since January 1, 2015, Boko Haram has carried out at least 28 major attacks on
Cameroonian soil —most of them in the far north region. According to the local
authorities in Maroua, the July 22 suicide bombings [were carried out by two
young girls](http://www.lemonde.fr/afrique/article/2015/07/22/un-double-
attentat-frappe-la-ville-de-maroua-dans-le-nord-du-cameroun_4694169_3212.html)
who were seen begging in the streets in previous days. The explosion killed at
least a dozen of people at the central market, but the exact number is still
uncertain. A security source confirmed that residents heard a double
explosion.

Despite these tragedies, the Cameroonian military has enjoyed some success
against Boko Haram, though the country has also had to deal with the massive
afflux of migrants fleeing the conflict.

##### The current situation in Chad

[![Chad Air Force Sukhoi Su-25 at N'djamena Airport CC-BY-40 license. Via
wikimedia commons](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2015/07/Chad_Air_Force_Sukhoi_Su-25_at_Ndjamena_Airport-800x450.jpeg)](https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Chad_Air_Force_Sukhoi_Su-25_at_N%27djamena_Airport_\(1\).jpeg)

Chad Air Force Sukhoi Su-25 at N'djamena Airport CC-BY-4.0 license. Wikimedia
commons.

The man who triggered a bomb on July 11 [was disguised as a veiled
woman](http://www.lardennais.fr/507922/article/2015-07-11/une-femme-kamizaze-
fait-exploser-sa-bombe-a-n-djamena-au-tchad-une-dizaine-de-mo) to conceal the
explosives. In light of this information, the government of Chad has decided
to ban the veil to prevent similar attacks. The consequences of the Boko Haram
insurgency have massively strained the region's stability, especially in Chad,
whose military power was the foundation of peacekeeping in Sahel. In recent
months, Chad has already been rocked by [student protests
](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2015/03/13/why-students-in-chad-are-
protesting-and-its-not-just-about-the-helmet-law/)and the June 20 start of the
trial of former leader Hissen Habre.

##### The current situation in Niger

[!["Landscape Diffa region Niger" by Roland Hunziker -
http://www.flickr.com/photos/rolandh/151126866/. Licensed under CC BY-SA 2.0
via Wikimedia Commons - ](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2015/07/Landscape_Diffa_region_Niger-800x450.jpg)](http://www.flickr.com/photos/rolandh/151126866/)

“Landscape Diffa region Niger” by Roland Hunziker. CC 2.0 via Wikimedia
Commons.

The Boko Haram insurgency has forced tens of thousands across the border into
Niger's arid southeastern region of Diffa, aggravating an already dire
humanitarian crisis. The flood of refugees comes as Niger declares a state of
emergency to tackle an insurgency that has brought Diffa's economy to a
standstill and left much of the population vulnerable.

##### The current situation in Nigeria

Prior to the March 2015 elections, the Nigerian Army had considerable gains in
repelling Boko Haram. However, a [renewed
offensive](https://www.thecable.ng/.Va_t8nQdJI0.twitter) by Boko Haram appears
to be underway, ahead of the inauguration of President Buhari's new
government. This is despite the fact that one of Buhari's first actions was to
move the nation's command headquarters of the military from the capital Abuja
to
[Maiduguri](https://www.google.com.ng/url?sa=t&rct=j&q=&esrc=s&source=web&cd=1&cad=rja&uact=8&ved=0CBwQFjAAahUKEwjIsKDKuu_GAhWJXhQKHecaAKM&url=https%3A%2F%2Fen.wikipedia.org%2Fwiki%2FMaiduguri&ei=8uyvVcjvIYm9Uee1gJgK&usg=AFQjCNEM2GmDLzpsuFeNCbMBoyAOcv9KBw&sig2=e9iK8qrJuXY8s9EuAP8lcA&bvm=bv.98197061,d.d24),
in Borno State—a hotpot of the Boko Haram insurgency.

> Reported explosion in [#Gombe](https://twitter.com/hashtag/Gombe?src=hash),
> northeast [#Nigeria](https://twitter.com/hashtag/Nigeria?src=hash). No
> further details.
>
> — Fidelis Mbah (@fidelisMbah) [July 22,
> 2015](https://twitter.com/fidelisMbah/status/623932112815718400)

Nonetheless, the new government has pushed a great deal for international
counterterrorist assistance, as evidenced by President Buhari's recent
meetings with the presidents of Chad, Cameroon, and Niger. Buhari has sought
and received assurances of assistance from the G7 and the United States, where
he is currently on a state visit. Buhari promised to [negotiate
](http://www.punchng.com/news/well-negotiate-with-bharam-to-free-chibok-girls-
buhari/)with the insurgents, if that would lead to the release of the 200
abducted Chibok girls, kidnapped more than a year ago:

> If we are convinced that we can have the girls, why not, we can negotiate.
> Our goal is to have the girls. We will ask them what they want and we can
> free the girls; return them to their school; unite them with their parents
> and rehabilitate them, so, they can live a normal life.

This post is co-authored by Nwachukwu Egbunike, Dibussi Tande, and Lova
Rakotomalala.

