**_This post is part of our special coverage[Syria Protests
2011](https://globalvoicesonline.org/specialcoverage/syria-protest-2011/)._**

It's the Friday of Rage in Syria, with tens of thousands of people taking to
the streets of different cities to call for the overthrow of the Al Assad
regime, and show solidarity with [Daraa](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Daraa),
which is facing a [ruthless
crackdown](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2011/04/28/syria-the-revolution-is-
continuing-in-daraa-are-you-with-us/) for being the nucleus the Syrian
protests.

Daraa, a city in southwestern Syria, and close to the Jordanian border, got
the brunt of the security crackdown, with electricity, water and
communications cuts.

The capital, Damascus, today joined the protests too, with videos showing
thousands protesting popping online. [This
video](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=rE-jW8dhgsE), by _mohamed82k_ , shows
Syrians protesting outside the Zaid and Al Hassan mosque:

<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=rE-jW8dhgsE>

Another YouTube user, _fnnsyria_ , posts [this
video](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=xHh4glYqdAM), saying it shows the
protests of the people from the city of Tal:

http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=xHh4glYqdAM

Protests also broke out in the southern Syrian two Jassem, near Daraa.
_fnnsyria_ shares [a video](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=xgoWL5quLdw) here,
showing crowds chanting: “The people want to overthrow the regime.”

http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=xgoWL5quLdw

In [Baniyas](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Baniyas), a city in northwestern
Syria, protesters too took to the streets en masse. _miliananet_ shares [this
video](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=XBy2VzhyPHQ) of the protests there:

http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=XBy2VzhyPHQ

_Rojdar2_ posts [this video](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=tNebNa03Kxc) of
protests in [Dayr az-Zawr](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Deir_ez-Zor), 450km to
the northeast of Damascus, where protesters are seen chanting “Syria!
Freedom!”

And in nearby Jordan, people too gathered to show support and solidarity with
the besieged people of Daraa. _miliananet_ shares [this
video](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Hk5tGfL5aJs) to show part of the
protest:

http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Hk5tGfL5aJs

For more on the Syrian revolution, please follow the hashtags
[#Daraa](https://twitter.com/#%21/search?q=%23Daraa) or[
#Syria](https://twitter.com/#!/search?q=%23Syria) on Twitter.

**_This post is part of our special coverage[Syria Protests
2011](https://globalvoicesonline.org/specialcoverage/syria-protest-2011/)._**

