_**This post is part of our special coverage[Syria Protests
2011](https://globalvoicesonline.org/specialcoverage/syria-protest-2011/).**_

As the [crackdown on
protests](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2011/03/23/syria-reports-of-mass-
killings-a-blogger-and-a-journalist-disappeared/) in Daraa continues and
reports pour in of more deaths, citizen reporters in the town are capturing
video and uploading it to YouTube, which was [only recently
unblocked](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2011/02/08/syria-facebook-and-
youtube-unblocked-among-others/) in Syria. The videos, all uploaded on March
23, 2011, show the violent crackdown on Syrians in the southern city of Daraa.

**WARNING** : Some of these videos are of an extremely graphic nature.

In this extremely graphic
[video](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=znIEcwj4qIk&feature=player_embedded)
uploaded to Youtube by user [SHAMSNN](http://www.youtube.com/user/SHAMSNN),
citizens call for an ambulance after a young man is presumably shot. At first
three men are seen to be lying in the street, but the camera then pans round
to reveal others who are injured. More gunshots are heard in the background.
The camera is then moved to view several severely injured men close-up.

In this video, also uploaded by
[SHAMSNN](http://www.youtube.com/user/SHAMSNN), citizens carry an injured man
lying in the street to safety as gunshots are heard in the background:

In this shaky video, gunshots can be heard as protestors demonstrate on the
street; a man yells “God is great!” then what appears to be tear gas can be
seen infiltrating the crowds. Uploaded to Youtube by
[islam1tv](http://www.youtube.com/user/islam1tv):

<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=iJp7lKt1I3I>

The video below was taken during the funeral procession on March 23 for the
six martyred in the early morning attack on [Al Omari
mosque](http://www.forbes.com/feeds/ap/2011/03/23/general-ml-
syria_8371432.html). The crowd shouts, “There is no God but God and the martyr
is with God!” Uploaded by Youtube user
[islam1tv](http://www.youtube.com/user/islam1tv):

<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Xce6iCe7vhE>

In this [graphic
video](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=cqt8-ImX_VU&feature=player_embedded),
the extent of the massacre can be seen, as bodies lie in the streets and those
who attempt to remove them are shot at. A group of men shelter behind a van to
avoid being shot at. Uploaded to Youtube by
[SHAMSNN](http://www.youtube.com/user/SHAMSNN).

_**This post is part of our special coverage[Syria Protests
2011](https://globalvoicesonline.org/specialcoverage/syria-protest-2011/).**_

