![Jukka Tiihonen served the last few years of his sentence for murder at this
open prison on Suomenlinna Island. Credit: Rae Ellen Bichell. Published with
PRI's permission](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2015/04/CROPformerprisoner.jpg)

Jukka Tiihonen served the last few years of his sentence for murder at this
open prison on Suomenlinna Island. Credit: Rae Ellen Bichell. Published with
PRI's permission

_This article and radio report by[Rae Ellen
Bichell](http://www.pri.org/people/rae-ellen-bichell) __for[The
World](http://www.pri.org/programs/the-world) originally [appeared on
PRI.org](http://www.pri.org/stories/2015-04-15/finlands-open-prisons-inmates-
have-keys) on April 15, 2015, and is republished here as part of a content-
sharing agreement._

To find the inmates at the prison in Kerava, Finland, just walk down a tree-
lined path and open the door to the greenhouse.

“It’s quite relaxing to be here,” says Hannu Kallio, a convicted drug
smuggler. “We have bunnies.”

The 70 inmates in this facility go to work every day in the greenhouse. Today,
they’re potting seedlings in preparation for a big spring sale. And yes,
there’s a pen of bunnies to hang out with and pet. There are also sheep.

But there aren't any gates, locks or uniforms — this is an open prison.
Everyone at the Kerava open prison applied to be here. They earn about $8 an
hour, have cell phones, do their grocery shopping in town and get three days
of vacation every couple of months. They pay rent to the prison; they choose
to study for a university degree in town instead of working, they get a
subsidy for it; they sometimes take supervised camping and fishing trips.

Inmates know it wouldn’t be hard to escape. “You can go if you want,” Kallio
says. “But if you escape, you go back to jail. Better to be here.”

![Each spring, hundreds of people come to the Kerava open prison to picnic,
pat the animals and buy plants cultivated by inmates.  Credit: Courtesy of
Criminal Sanctions Agency, Finland](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2015/04/CROPgreenhouse.jpg)

Each spring, hundreds of people come to the Kerava open prison to picnic, pat
the animals and buy plants cultivated by inmates. Credit: Courtesy of Criminal
Sanctions Agency, Finland

Open prisons have been around in Finland since about the 1930s. Back then,
they were more like labor colonies. These days, they’re the last step of a
prison sentence before inmates make the transition back to regular life.

“There is no idea that we are locking people up for the rest of their lives,”
says Tapio Lappi-Seppälä, head of the Institute of Criminology at the
University of Helsinki, “because if that’s the case, you really should invest
and make sure that there is the possibility of rehabilitation.”

It wasn’t always like this. A few decades ago, Finland had one of the [highest
rates](http://www.unafei.or.jp/english/pdf/RS_No74/No74_05VE_Seppala1.pdf) of
imprisonment in Europe. Then, in the 1960s, researchers across the Nordic
countries started investigating how much punishment really helps reduce crime.
The conclusion: It doesn’t.

“This was the first time that you had critical research showing that
imprisonment really doesn’t work,” Lappi-Seppälä says.

Over the next three decades, Finland remade its penal policy bit by bit. By
the end of this [period of
“decarceration,”](http://epublications.marquette.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=1057&context=socs_fac)
Finland had one of the lowest rates of imprisonment on the continent. Lappi-
Seppälä says crime didn’t increase as a result.

“The lesson from Finland was that it was perfectly possible to drop the use of
imprisonment [by two-thirds,]” he says, “and that did not disturb the crime
trend development in Finland.”

What did work was a gradual reintroduction into normal life, the kind that the
open prisons offer. About a third of Finnish inmates are housed in open
prison, and Finland’s Criminal Sanctions Agency says inmates who go through
open prisons are less likely to be arrested again. The reoffending rate drops
almost 20 percent.

Open prisons also cost less. Esa Vesterbacka, head of the country's Criminal
Sanctions Agency, says that by eliminating the need for extra security systems
and personnel — and by housing people in what are essentially dorms — the cost
per prisoner drops almost a third. It isn’t the main reason for having these
kinds of prisons, Vesterbacka says, “but, of course, if you can make something
cheaper that’s good nowadays.”

There's even an open prison at Helsinki’s top tourist attraction, Suomenlinna
Island. The island is a UNESCO World Heritage Site, and it swarms with
tourists in the summer. Yet the only thing that separates the prison grounds
from a block of residential apartments and museums is a yellow picket fence.

![Inmates at the Suomenlinna open prison live in blue dormitory-style housing.
A picket fence is all that separates the prison grounds from the rest of the
island, a popular tourist destination. Credit: Courtesy of Criminal Sanctions
Agency, Finland](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2015/04/Suomenlinna-Open-Prison_1.jpg)

Inmates at the Suomenlinna open prison live in blue dormitory-style housing. A
picket fence is all that separates the prison grounds from the rest of the
island, a popular tourist destination. Credit: Courtesy of Criminal Sanctions
Agency, Finland

“You really don’t realize that you are walking in the middle of an open
prison,” Lappi-Seppälä says. “Nobody thinks of it. But I don’t think even the
American tourists find it scary.”

Locals seem to agree. When I talk to residents near the Kerava and Suomenlinna
open prisons, most seem confused when I ask if they’re concerned about sharing
the town with convicts. Some tell me that the prisoners improve the community
by restoring historic sites or cleaning up public spaces.

It’s tempting to wonder how this system might work in other countries —
notably the US, which incarcerates more people than any other country in the
world. Heather Thompson, a professor of history at Temple University who
studies mass incarceration and prison populations, says it’s hard to know
because the US isn’t having that discussion.

“We're just now getting to the point of recognizing that we're incarcerating
far too many people. We have yet to have a conversation about the actual
conditions of confinement, what it is that people actually experience in
prison so they can be whole human beings when they return.”

When I spoke with Hannu Kallio at Kerava open prison, he was about to move out
to spend the last months of his sentence at home, working at a recycling
center and living with his wife, daughters and Jack Russell terrier.

A fellow inmate, Juha, who doesn't want to give his last name, is expecting
his first child. He's serving a life sentence, but most such sentences in
Finland are commuted to 10 or 15 years. ““It’s a pretty big deal,” Juha says,
“but I don’t know when I’m going to get out. Basically, his mother is going to
raise him.”

Juha’s not sure when he’ll be able to go home to his new family, but he knows
that he eventually will. And for someone who started out in maximum-security
prison with a life sentence, that says a lot.

