[![First frames of Dymovskiy's Video
Address](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2010/12/dymovskiy-352x300.jpg)](http://www.youtube.com/watch?feature=related&hl=ru&v=2G3KbBfpg24)

First frames of Dymovskiy's Video Address

Almost a year has passed since a former Novorossiysk police officer, [Alexey
Dymovskiy](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Alexey_Dymovsky),
[shot](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2009/11/09/officer-exposes-police-
corruption-using-the-web/) a famous
[video](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=2G3KbBfpg24&feature=related) about
corruption in the Russian police that has been viewed almost a million times.
Since then, several police officers have followed in his footsteps, uploading
YouTube testimonies of wrongdoings within the police force. Unfortunately,
nearly all have suffered arrests, beatings, firings or criminal prosecution,
and justice has never been done.

It's not that corruption in the Russian police was unknown before Dymovskiy's
video. It was the medium he chose for telling this open secret that attracted
so much attention. The full disclosure of the identity of the messenger was an
essential part of the message, and it introduced a new form of citizen-to-
government public communication: an online video address to the president or
prime minister.

This form of public communication quickly caught on. At least seven former and
present law enforcers copied the technique and presented their addresses on
YouTube. Many others have followed. A search on YouTube currently reveals
[more than 1700
videos](http://www.youtube.com/results?search_query=%D0%9E%D0%B1%D1%80%D0%B0%D1%89%D0%B5%D0%BD%D0%B8%D0%B5+%D0%BA+%D0%BF%D1%80%D0%B5%D0%B7%D0%B8%D0%B4%D0%B5%D0%BD%D1%82%D1%83&aq=f)
[RUS] entitled “Address to the president” uploaded within the last year.

Sadly, the online activity of the ‘YouTube cops’ has not yet changed things
for the better. Quite to the contrary: many of the most notorious of these
newborn “video-bloggers” have been prosecuted.

**Serious personal consequences**

Alexey Dymovskiy became the first victim of his own initiative. On December
29, 2009 a criminal case against him [was
initiated](http://www.yuga.ru/news/176167/). He was accused of fraud and
misuse of authority. At the same time, the police investigation unit didn't
find any evidence of the crimes he spoke about in his video address. On
January 22, 2010 Dymovskiy was
[arrested](http://www.rosbalt.ru/2010/01/22/706305.html) and spent almost 1,5
months in jail until he was released on March 7. On March 23, 2010 Krasnodar
city court [ruled](http://lenta.ru/news/2010/03/23/dymovsky/) that Dymovskiy
was guilty of libel against his former bosses and obliged him to pay an
overall compensation fee of $3000.

On February 21, 2010, Vadim Karastelyov, a non-governmental activist and
supporter of Dymovskiy, was
[detained](http://www.newsru.com/russia/20feb2010/ar7.html) [RUS] for seven
days for organizing a support rally for Dymovskiy that was not endorsed by the
local authorities. Immediately after his release Karastelyov [was
assaulted](http://www.kasparov.ru/material.php?id=4B87779C358B2) at the door
of his home and beaten.

Mikhail Yevseev, a former investigative crime officer, delivered his [YouTube
video address]( http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=DG8moeSN1lc&feature=related)
[RUS] on November 11, 2009. Yevseev spoke of corruption and about two people
who were sentenced for life for setting fire to a trade center. Yevseev
claimed the two were innocent and that he was forced to testify against them.
In August 2010, two criminal cases [were brought against
him](http://www.gazeta-respublika.ru/article.php/30496) [RUS] (both by former
police colleagues of Yevseev). On November 17, 2010, one year after the
release of the video, Yevseev [was sentenced to one year in a penal
colony](http://www.bnkomi.ru/data/news/6392/) [RUS] “for releasing government
secrets.”

Grigoriy Chekalin, the deputy prosecutor of the Ukhta city released his [video
address](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=fIhzedSV9GU) [RUS] on November 12,
2009. He spoke about the same arson case as Yevseev. On December 3, 2010
Chekalin [was sentenced to 1,5 years in a penal
colony](http://bnkomi.ru/data/news/6545/) [RUS] for presenting false evidence.

Vadim Smirnov, another retired ‘YouTube cop’ from Moscow wasn't prosecuted
following [ his video-address](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=XrE9Alo50Wc).
Soon after the video was uploaded he vanished from the blogosphere. Since
then, there has been no news reported about him – probably, he was overwhelmed
by the media effect he created.

Tatyana Domracheva, a police officer from Yekaterinburg, [released her video
address on June 26, 2010]( http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=9SPp483MkDQ ) [RUS].
She accused her colleagues and superiors of numerous unlawful actions. Only
1,5 months after her YouTube video she was [fired due to
formalities](http://www.gazeta.ru/social/2010/09/01/3413867.shtml) [RUS]. Her
(former) boss threatened to start a criminal case against her, _Kasparov.ru_
[reported](http://www.kasparov.ru/material.php?id=4B051BC9A13D2) [RUS].

Three other Dymovskiy's followers (click on their names to watch the video-
addresses), [Igor Konygin](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=NtPgGM6gxnc) [RUS],
[Alexey
Mumolin](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=D1Yzmqw69AY&feature=player_embedded)
[RUS], and [Alexander
Popkov](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=rdYKOSwJ1yo&feature=player_embedded)
[RUS] have so far not faced legal charges. Popkov, however, was implicated in
an internal investigation, and a professional background check was begun on
Mumolin, _Vremya.ru_ [reported](http://www.vremya.ru/2010/223/46/265952.html).

**More still adding their voices**

Public opinion on the ‘YouTube cops’ is divided. After the initial chaotic
support for their cause, some liberal journalists
[claimed](http://www.polit.ru/news/2009/11/17/gaika.html) [RUS] that Dymovskiy
was involved in a number crimes himself, and that he had no right to accuse
the police of corruption. There is plenty of evidence to suggest that mostly
every YouTube cop has been involved in some kind of suspicious activity in the
course of their career.

Although accusations against Dymovskiy and others still stand, the furious
reaction of the police chiefs, and the considerable risks taken by the video
makers, is one kind of evidence that what they say is true. In all cases, the
police commanders have focused on eliminating the sources of the ‘public
leakage’ rather than attempting to make changes (the police reform introduced
at the end of 2009 can [hardly be considered an actual
change](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2010/11/03/russia-rebranding-of-the-
police/)).

The story of ‘YouTube cops’ vividly shows how Russian law enforcement
structures react to the attempts of online whistle-blowers. Dymovskiy and his
followers have not experienced the same glorious fate of [Frank
Serpico](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Frank_Serpico), a New York policeman who
testified against city corruption. Unlike Serpiko, Dymovskiy has not received
any awards, and his story has not been turned into a Hollywood movie (other
than the movie he made himself, of course). So far, he and his supporters have
been persecuted, marginalized, and their claims were ignored.

Still, there are those who continue to speak up about corruption. On December
6, 2010 Yekaterina Rogoza, a police officer from Kushchevskaya village ([a
place where a local gang set fire to a family of
12](http://www.opendemocracy.net/od-russia/grigorii-golosov/kushchevskaya-
crime-and-punishment-in-russian-village)), [recorded an online video
address](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Cpce9MLMrTc&feature=player_embedded)
[RUS] claiming she was forced by the local prosecutor to protect the gang and
turn down any criminal cases against them. On the day after her YouTube
upload, NTV [national
television](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=c9LmhPIQa0A&feature=player_embedded)
broadcast an interview with her, offering hope that public pressure might
force some kind of official action.

The fact that they use digital technology doesn't mean Dymovskiy or any of
those who followed in his footsteps are saints, but it definitely brings
forward a point of view that otherwise would be silenced. Maybe this one time,
an online testimony can change something for the better?

