The [release](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2010/11/14/myanmar-suu-kyi-is-
free-at-last/) from detention of Myanmar’s Aung San Suu Kyi and the [Red Shirt
protests](https://globalvoicesonline.org/specialcoverage/thailand-red-shirt-
protests-2010/) in Thailand were probably the top political stories of 2010 as
far as Southeast Asia is concerned. But there are other notable issues in the
region which were featured by Global Voices. Here is our year-end report:

**Social media**

2010 was an election year in the Philippines and Myanmar and social media was
effectively used to
[monitor](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2010/05/11/monitoring-philippine-
elections-through-social-media/) the election results in the Philippines, and
to popularize the [‘boycott
elections’](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2010/10/27/myanmar-boycott-
elections-campaign/) campaign in Myanmar.

Through twitter, Filipinos sent [‘Merry
Christmas’](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2010/09/02/philippines-merry-
christmas-is-top-twitter-topic/) greetings in September. A [suicide
atempt](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2010/11/18/brunei-suicide-attempt-
stirs-online-buzz/) in Brunei was documented in the twitterspehere. #slashing
and #369 hashtags refer to the series of [slashing
attacks](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2010/11/14/singapore-rising-gang-
violence/) in Singapore.

Blogs were used to promote [national
unity](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2010/07/07/malaysia-blogging-to-promote-
national-unity/) in Malaysia. _Borneo Colours_ aggregates blogs in
[Borneo](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2010/07/14/borneo-island-uniting-
bloggers-through-borneo-colours/), the third largest island in the world.
_BruneiTweet_ is the [‘national twitter
account’](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2010/09/30/bruneis-national-twitter-
account/) of Brunei. Launched in Singapore and now operating in Indonesia,
Philippines and India,
_[sexxie.tv](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2010/11/02/southeast-asia-
interactive-sex-education-website/)_ is an interactive sex education website.
GV author Keta Haluha features some prominent [Timorese on
Facebook](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2010/09/05/timorese-on-facebook/).

A video showing [police
brutality](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2010/01/25/timor-police-brutality-
video/) in East Timor was uploaded in the internet. A domestic helper from the
Philippines was able to
[record](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2010/11/03/philippines-labor-attache-
earns-filipino-migrant-communitys-ire/) how a Filipino labor attaché in Hong
Kong treats distressed workers. A blogger named Sony from Indonesia was
[sued](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2010/04/02/indonesia-sony-versus-sony/)
by Sony Corporation for domain name infringement. Facebookers from Thailand
created a page criticizing the country’s [Ministry of
Culture](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2010/01/11/thailand-%e2%80%9cwere-
sick-of-ministry-of-culture%e2%80%9d/). A father from Vietnam asked netizens
to [help](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2010/02/25/vietnam-dad-asks-netizens-
to-help-find-missing-daughter/) his missing daughter.

Global Voices reported these citizen media events: [Singapore
Twestival](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2010/03/31/singapore-
twestivalsg-2010/), [Barcamp Phnom
Penh](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2010/09/05/cambodia-countdown-to-barcamp-
phnom-penh-2010/), Myanmar’s first [Barcamp in
Yangon](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2010/02/01/myanmars-first-barcamp-in-
yangon/), [Barcamp and Educamp
Saigon](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2010/12/17/vietnam-barcamp-and-educamp-
saigon-2010/).

[![Screenshot of Global Voices website being banned in
Myanmar](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-content/uploads/2010/01/gv-access-
denied.jpg)](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-content/uploads/2010/01/gv-
access-denied.jpg)

Screenshot of Global Voices website being banned in Myanmar

**Censorship**

Web and media censorship have intensified in the region. Press freedom and
freedom of expression were topics which were actively written by blogger
advocates in [Malaysia](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2010/08/20/malaysia-
where-is-press-freedom-heading-now/),
[Singapore](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2010/07/22/censorship-in-
singapore/), and
[Cambodia](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2010/02/11/cambodia-mixed-views-on-
freedom-of-expression/).

Internet freedom is restricted by using various legal measures like Cambodia’s
[internet firewall](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2010/03/02/cambodias-great-
internet-firewall/) and Thailand’s [cyber
scout](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2010/12/24/cyber-scout-
thailand%e2%80%99s-internet-police/) program. Netizens are complaining that a
higher number of websites and blogs, including Global Voices, continue to be
[inaccessible](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2010/01/18/more-websites-banned-
in-myanmar-global-voices-banned-too/) in Myanmar. Governments across the
region are using the excuse of protecting the morals of the young to block the
web’s [‘harmful’](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2010/07/16/southeast-asia-
sex-and-web-censorship/) content.

To improve media freedom, civil society groups pushed for the immediate
passage of the [Freedom of Information
bill](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2010/06/09/philippines-congress-fails-to-
pass-freedom-of-information-bill/) in the Philippines. Meanwhile, netizens in
Indonesia rejected the
[“repressive”](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2010/02/17/sos-internet-
indonesia/) internet regulations drafted by the government.

[![](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2010/10/merapi-375x237.jpg)](http://www.facebook.com/photo.php?fbid=443121106315&set=a.443120986315.242329.79572061315)

Photo of eruption impact in Indonesia from the FB page of Jogjaku

**Disaster**

2010 was also a year of disasters. The most deadly was the [stampede
tragedy](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2010/11/29/cambodia-lessons-from-the-
water-festival-stampede/) during the [Water
Festival](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2010/11/23/cambodia-stampede-tragedy-
during-water-festival/) in Cambodia.

Indonesia was hit by an earthquake, tsunami, and volcanic eruption in less
than [48 hours](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2010/10/28/indonesia-
earthquake-tsunami-volcanic-eruption-in-48-hours/). Flooding disasters struck
[West Papua](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2010/10/07/indonesia-west-papua-
flashflood/) in Indonesia, Singapore,
[Thailand](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2010/10/21/thailand-worst-flooding-
in-decades/), Vietnam, and the [northern
states](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2010/11/07/malaysia-flood-hits-
northern-states/) of Malaysia. Imagine the [shopping
district](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2010/08/08/the-great-floods-of-
singapore/) of Singapore under floodwaters. Bangkok was also
[flooded](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2010/10/26/flooding-disaster-in-
thailand/) for many weeks. A [water shortage
crisis](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2010/07/22/philippines-manila-water-
crisis/) was felt by Filipinos last July.

Singaporeans suffered the most when
[haze](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2010/10/22/haze-envelops-singapore/)
enveloped the skies of Singapore, Malaysia, and Indonesia. An [oil
spill](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2010/05/29/oil-spill-disaster-in-
singapore/) also destroyed a coastal area in Singapore.

Netizens reported the impact of the earthquake last April in
[Sumatra](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2010/04/08/indonesia-sumatra-quake-
reporting-with-twitter/), Indonesia. Citizen journalists also documented the
conditions of
[refugees](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2010/01/03/philippines-life-in-
evacuation-centers/) in Albay, Philippines after a volcanic eruption forced
the residents to leave their homes.

[![](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-content/uploads/2010/05/bangkok-
skyline.jpg)](http://twitpic.com/1p2rnp)

Bangkok burning. Photo by BKKApologist

**Politics**

As mentioned earlier, the Red Shirt protests in Thailand, which crippled the
country’s capital for [two
months](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2010/04/11/thailand-bloggers-document-
violent-clashes/), could be the top political event in the region in 2010.

Thousands of anti-government protesters
[stormed](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2010/04/12/thailand-citizen-videos-
of-violent-clash/) the capital and formed a
[blockade](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2010/05/16/bangkok-clashes-pictures-
videos-and-twitter-reports/) in government buildings to demand the resignation
of the Prime Minister. It was a
[‘bloody’](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2010/03/16/thailand-%e2%80%9cbloody%e2%80%9d-tuesday/)
protest as protesters splattered blood in buildings and houses of government
officials. The Bangkok
[clashes](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2010/05/20/thailand-arson-in-bangkok-
protests-spread-to-other-provinces/) between protesters and government troops
were documented by
[bloggers](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2010/05/21/thailand-blog-reactions-
to-bangkok-violence/), despite the censorship imposed by authorities.

The other politically significant event in Southeast Asia was the release from
detention of Suu Kyi. This proved to be successful, at least for now, in
distracting the attention of the world that it is still the junta-backed party
which dominated the [polls](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2010/11/09/myanmar-
election-junta-backed-party-wins-violence-erupts/) in Myanmar. By the way,
Myanmar has a [new flag and new
name](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2010/10/26/myanmars-new-flag-and-new-
name/).

More than 30 years after the fall of the Khmer Rouge Regime in Cambodia, the
first [guilty verdict](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2010/08/02/cambodia-
mixed-views-on-duch-verdict/) was handed out by the Khmer Rouge Tribunal The
conviction of Kaing Guek Eav aka Duch for committing crimes against humanity
was a globally significant news event.

Meanwhile, in Laos, the [Convention on Cluster
Munitions](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2010/11/26/laos-and-the-convention-
on-cluster-munitions/) was held which highlighted the fact that Laos is the
most bombed country in the world.

Obama’s [homecoming](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2010/11/11/obamas-
indonesian-homecoming-charms-residents/) speech in Indonesia inspired many
Indonesians. Another speech which was vigorously discussed by netizens was the
Independence Day [speech](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2010/08/18/indonesia-
whats-wrong-mr-president/) of the Indonesian president.

The Malaysia-Indonesia maritime [border
row](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2010/09/06/malaysia-indonesia-border-row/)
was one of the numerous border disputes in the region. The Philippines
[apologized](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2010/08/28/philippines-%e2%80%9chong-
kong-our-apology-for-what-happened%e2%80%9d/) to Hong Kong after nine HK
tourists were killed in a [bus
hostage](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2010/08/24/philippines-hostage-drama-
ends-in-violence/) drama.

[![](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2010/12/pinoyleaks-375x184.png)](http://www.pinoyleaks.org/)

[**Wikileaks**](https://globalvoicesonline.org/specialcoverage/wikileaks-and-
the-world/)

Wikileaks provided some interesting gossips about the politics in the region.
Singapore’s Lee Kuan Yew described North Koreans as [‘psychopathic
types’](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2010/12/02/singapore-wikileaks-and-
the-%e2%80%9cflabby-old-chap%e2%80%9d-comment/) ruled by a ‘flabby old chap.’
Singapore’s other senior diplomats also had some unflattering words to say
about the leaders of their
[neighbours](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2010/12/13/wikileaks-reveals-how-
singapore-views-its-neighbors/). As expected, Singapore dismissed the
Wikileaks revelations as mere [‘cocktail
talk’](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2010/12/14/singapore-dismisses-
wikileaks-expose-as-mere-%e2%80%98cocktail-talk%e2%80%99/).

Malaysia was forced to
[deny](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2010/12/05/malaysia-two-firms-mentioned-
in-wikileaks-documents/) that it was involved in the procurement of a missile
technology from China which was intended for Iran. Leaked cables from Thailand
revealed the international pressure on the [Viktor Bout
case](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2010/12/07/wikileaks-and-thailand/). Bout
is accused of being the world’s leading arms smuggler.

Wikileaks [clones](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2010/12/28/wikileaks-
thaileaks-indoleaks-pinoyleaks/) which sprouted in the region: Thaileaks,
Indoleaks, and Pinoyleaks.

**Economy**

Malaysia launched its [‘new economic
model’](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2010/04/02/malaysia-new-economic-
model/) in 2010. Bloggers reacted strongly when the Prime Minister announced
the country’s [2011
budget](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2010/10/17/malaysia-
budget-2011-announced-2/), especially the plan to build a new [mega
tower](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2010/11/02/malaysia-no-to-mega-tower/).

There is a raging debate in Singapore on whether to impose a [minimum
wage](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2010/09/28/singapore-minimum-wage-
debate/) legislation. A [bank
bailout](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2010/03/08/indonesia-bank-bailout-
sparks-political-crisis/) in Indonesia became politically controversial. [New
banknotes](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2010/12/26/philippines-filipinos-
welcome-new-year-with-new-banknotes/) are now in use in Laos and the
Philippines, but some critics are not happy.

**Sports**

[Football blogs](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2010/09/27/southeast-asia-
blogging-about-football/) in the region were featured on Global Voices. The
ASEAN Football Federation Cup generated an online buzz especially during the
[championship game](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2010/12/29/malaysia-
indonesia-soccer-match-turns-into-war-of-words/) between Malaysia and
Indonesia. [Cambodian](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2010/06/17/cambodia-
reactions-to-the-2010-world-cup-season/) and
[Myanmar](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2010/07/04/myanmar-world-cup-
reactions/) bloggers had some interesting comments about the World Cup.

**Religion**

Christian churches were attacked in
[Malaysia](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2010/01/13/church-attacks-in-
malaysia/) and
[Indonesia](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2010/09/19/indonesia-local-
government-closes-church-defying-court-order/). Church
[leaders](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2010/09/13/indonesia-online-rage-
over-attack-on-church-leaders/) were also harassed. [Monk
morality](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2010/07/09/cambodia-decline-of-monk-
morality/) was questioned in Cambodia. A
[pastor](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2010/02/21/singapore-netizens-angry-
over-pastor%e2%80%99s-comments-on-buddhism-and-taoism/) in Singapore ridiculed
the teachings of Taoism and Buddhism. Bloggers reported how Muslims
[celebrate](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2010/09/07/brunei-charity-food-and-
ramadhan/) Ramadhan in Brunei. Thai citizens were shocked to discover more
than two thousand [dead
fetuses](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2010/11/22/thailand-two-thousand-dead-
fetuses-in-buddhist-temple/) in a Buddhist temple in Bangkok.

**Education**

[Education budget cuts](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2010/11/29/philippines-
student-unrest-over-education-budget-cuts/) prompted Filipino students to
stage a strike in public universities. The proposal to include [sex
education](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2010/07/07/philippines-bloggers-
views-on-sex-education/) in the school curriculum also became a hot topic in
the internet.

Malaysia implemented some education reforms like the
[scrapping](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2010/10/12/malaysia-should-schools-
abolish-examinations/) of two examinations at the [primary
level](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2010/07/01/malaysia-education-ministry-
plans-to-scrap-two-exams/); and it recently imposed a
[moratorim](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2010/12/14/malaysia-moratorium-on-
medical-schools/) on medical schools to address the oversupply of doctors and
housemen.

[![](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2010/06/pinkdot.jpg)](http://pinkdotsg.blogspot.com/2010/05/thank-
you-4000-of-you.html)

Photo from Pink Dot Blog

**Gender**

A political group in the Philippines proposed the legislation of a [Renewable
Marriage](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2010/01/26/philippines-%e2%80%9crenewable-
marriage-bill%e2%80%9d/) law. [Child
brides](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2010/12/07/malaysias-14-year-old-
bride/) were reported in Malaysia.

Cambodia’s first [women web
portal](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2010/03/08/first-cambodian-women-web-
portal/) was enthusiastically welcomed by the online community. [Female
entrepreneurship](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2010/06/12/indonesia-when-
women-control-their-own-investments/) in Indonesia is gaining more support.
Brunei bloggers raised awareness on [breast
cancer](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2010/04/26/brunei-foodies-go-
pink-2010/).

Singapore’s _Pink Dot_
[event](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2010/06/05/singapore-pink-dot-2010/) in
solidarity with the LGBT community was successfully held. Cambodian bloggers
also openly discussed [LGBT
issues](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2010/01/14/cambodia-bloggers-discuss-
lgbt-issues/).

Three women in Malaysia were caned for having [illicit
sex](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2010/03/07/malaysia-3-women-caned-for-
having-illicit-sex/). Some groups described the [‘dancing flight
attendants’](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2010/10/06/philippines-dancing-
flight-attendants/) in the Philippines as a sexist stunt.

**Other GV stories**

[Dancing prisoners](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2010/06/29/philippines-
dancing-prisoners-tribute-to-michael-jackson/) in 2007 were replaced by the
[Dancing Tax
Collectors](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2010/10/23/philippines-popular-
dancing-videos/) in 2010 in the Philippines.
[Durian](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2010/08/28/southeast-asia-durian-
the-%e2%80%9cking-of-fruits%e2%80%9d/), popular in Southeast Asia, is the King
of the Fruits. Should Singapore food bloggers get [free
meals](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2010/08/27/singapore-should-food-
bloggers-get-free-meals/)?

This [‘I am sorry’](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2010/08/20/brunei-im-sorry-
video-now-a-youtube-sensation/) video from Brunei was viewed by many people.
[Water buffaloes](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2010/02/11/indonesia-water-
buffalo-banned-in-rallies/) were banned in Indonesia rallies. Convicted of
vandalism, a Swiss national was
[caned](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2010/06/30/singapore-swiss-national-to-
be-caned-for-train-vandalism/) in Singapore.

[Palm oil](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2010/03/21/malaysia-whats-the-real-
deal-with-palm-oil/) production in Malaysia is more than just an energy issue.
A [historic jail](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2010/06/27/malaysia-historic-
jail-demolished/) was demolished in Malaysia. Protests are allowed in Cambodia
if they are conducted in [freedom
parks](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2010/05/09/cambodia-freedom-of-assembly-
in-freedom-park/). Hanoi celebrated its
[1,000th](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2010/10/11/vietnam-
hanoi%e2%80%99s-1000th-birthday-festivities/) founding year.

In behalf of the Southeast Asia team of Global Voices, we thank all our
readers for supporting us in 2010. We pledge to continue reporting the
relevant and outstanding citizen media stories in the region. Happy New Year
to all!

