![A scene from Banksy's mini-documentary from his visit to Gaza
](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-content/uploads/2015/02/Screen-
Shot-2015-02-27-at-12.03.44-AM-800x500.png)

A scene from Banksy's mini-documentary from his visit to Gaza

Famous British street artist [Banksy](http://banksy.co.uk) went undercover in
Gaza and released a series of thought-provoking graffiti as well as a mini
documentary.

Banksy also released a short two-minute documentary entitled “Make this the
year YOU discover a new destination” on his [website](http://www.banksy.co.uk)
and [YouTube page](https://www.youtube.com/channel/UCxbCoGJrG1TYaQ36fP7Huuw).
In it, we see Banksy entering Gaza through one of the countless tunnels dug by
Gazans across their borders with Egypt and Israel.

The documentary looks like a sarcastic version of a tourism ad as Banksy
welcomes us to this city that's “well away from the tourist track”. He
describes the people of Gaza as liking it so much they never leave, before
adding between parentheses “because they're not allowed to”.

![Screenshot from Banksy's ""](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2015/02/Capture-d’écran-2015-02-26-à-17.12.12.png)

Screenshot from Banksy's “Make this the year YOU discover a new destination”

Banksy then went on to describe Gaza's neighbors as friendly, and then adding
that over 18,000 homes were destroyed in Gaza during Israel's so-called
‘Operation Protective Edge’, as [we previously covered on Global
Voices](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2014/08/27/ceasefire-peace-deal-israel-
hamas-gaza-50-days-of-war-and-damage/). ‘Development opportunities are
everywhere’, he tells us before adding “no cement has been allowed into Gaza
since the bombing.”

Soon after, we see the first graffiti, entitled “Bomb Damage” and possibly
inspired by Rodin's “[The Thinker](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Thinker)“.
It was posted to his [Instagram
account](https://instagram.com/p/zhVCCqK-1o/?modal=true) and got over 12,000
likes at the time of writing. Rather than representing philosophy as The
Thinker does, this figure seems to be sheltering herself from the devastation
around her.

!["Bomb Damage" by Banksy. Photo from
www.banksy.co.uk](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2015/02/Banksy-Gaza-2.jpg)

“Bomb Damage” by Banksy. Photo from www.banksy.co.uk

The second one, originally posted on
[streetartnews](http://www.streetartnews.net/2015/02/banksy-unveils-new-
series-of-pieces-in.html), transforms a symbol of Israel's occupation, a
towering guard station, into an object of amusement for children. Guard
stations are placed along the ‘Apartheid Wall’, one of the terms used for
Israel's West Bank barrier, which will be
[approximately](http://www.ochaopt.org/documents/ocha_opt_barrier_update_july_2011_english.pdf)
700km (434 miles) upon completion.

![Photo from www.banksy.co.uk](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2015/02/Banksy-Gaza-5.jpg)

Photo from www.banksy.co.uk

The third one targets the Internet's love of cats. In it, we see a kitten
playing with a ball of coiled metal rather than the usual cotton ball. Banksy
was [quoted in RT](http://rt.com/news/235703-banksy-gaza-strip-palestine/) as
saying: “A local man came up and said ‘Please – what does this mean?’ I
explained I wanted to highlight the destruction in Gaza by posting photos on
my website – but on the internet people only look at pictures of kittens.”

![Cat](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-content/uploads/2015/02/Banksy-
Gaza-4.jpg)

Cat playing with a ball of coiled metal. Photo from www.banksy.co.uk

We see Gazan children playing next to the kitten, and a father interviewed by
Banksy tells us:

> This cat tells the whole world that she is missing joy in her life. The cat
> found something to play with. What about our children? What about our
> children?

Finally, Banksy's message can be summarized by the quote he wrote on a wall in
Gaza, which reads:

> If we wash our hands of the conflict between the powerful and the powerless,
> we side with the powerful – we don't remain neutral.

![Palestinian kid climbs the wall featuring Banksy's
message](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-content/uploads/2015/02/Banksy-
Gaza-3.jpg)

Palestinian kid climbs the wall featuring Banksy's message. Image from
Banksy.co.uk

This is not the first time that Banksy visits Palestine. [The graffiti that he
made](http://electronicintifada.net/content/well-known-uk-graffiti-artist-
banksy-hacks-wall/5733) on the Palestinian side of the West Bank barrier
remains some of his most well-known ones. Here are a few of them.

![Banksy in the West Bank. Photo from
www.banksy.co.uk](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2015/02/west-bank.jpg)

Banksy in the West Bank. Photo from www.banksy.co.uk

![Banksy in the West Bank. Photo from
www.banksy.co.uk](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2015/02/west-bank2.jpg)

Banksy in the West Bank. Photo from www.banksy.co.uk

![Banksy in the West Bank. Photo from
www.banksy.co.uk](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2015/02/west-bank3.jpg)

Banksy in the West Bank. Photo from www.banksy.co.uk

![Banksy in the West Bank. Photo from
www.banksy.co.uk](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2015/02/west-bank5.jpg)

Banksy in the West Bank. Photo from www.banksy.co.uk

![Banksy in the West Bank. Photo from
www.banksy.co.uk](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2015/02/west-bank4.png)

Banksy in the West Bank. Photo from www.banksy.co.uk

