![\(R\), Olja_Bećković \(L\). Images mixed from wikimedia commons and
Vreme.com](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2014/11/serbiafreedom.png)

Popular journalists Predrag Sarapa (L), Olja Bećković (R) recently had their
political shows taken off-air in Serbia. Images mixed from [Vreme
](http://www.vreme.com/cms/view.php?id=1228815)and [Media Center
Belgrade](http://www.mc.rs).

The current and previous government in Serbia invested years into cleaning up
the image of this Eastern European country that was known for decades as a hot
spot for crime and war. Figureheads from across the political spectrum have
sought to demonstrate their commitment to Serbia’s accession to the European
Union. Publicly, they appear to want Serbia to become a truly free,
democratic, and economically successful country. The reality, however, is
different.

While most of Serbia's politicians appear committed to bettering the economy
and quality of life in Serbia, their practices surrounding one of the most
basic and necessary human rights in the country – the right to freedom of
expression – are far from conducive to developing an open and prosperous
society.

Pressure on independent media from ruling politicians has been mounting in
recent months. Following a wave of critical reporting on government officials’
poor management of relief and rescue operations during massive floods in the
region last spring, three long-standing and popular television shows were
taken off the air. Journalists and editors routinely avoid reporting on these
matters in media, with most living in daily fear of losing their livelihoods,
which usually amount to a monthly net salary of between EU 250 and 300.

The media landscape in Serbia mirrors that of many [other countries in the
region](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2014/02/19/the-journalistic-purgatory-
of-eastern-europe/). As in Albania, Macedonia, Bulgaria, Hungary, and other
countries, media houses rely chiefly on advertising revenue to stay afloat,
which is often connected to political parties and figures. In Serbia, this
unofficial but powerful system has been exploited by various democratic
coalitions that held power between 2003 and 2012.

Almost a year ago, in February 2014, there were already signs that popular
talk shows that discuss politics and economy [might be taken off the
air](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2014/02/02/political-pressure-on-serbian-
media-begins-to-show-on-tv/). During the pre-election campaign ahead of the
March 2014 early parliamentary elections, the pressure became more evident to
the public and it finally began to affect the public directly, with some
social media users being [brought in for police
questioning](http://www.dnevno.rs/vesti/crna-hronika/144384-uhapseni-zbog-
sirenja-panike-tokom-poplava-ophodili-se-prema-nama-kao-da-smo-drzavni-
neprijatelji.html) and sometimes detained for [tweeting
critically](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2014/05/25/serbians-fight-online-
censorship-of-flood-response-criticism/) about the government. The Serbian
Progressive Party won an absolute majority in government in the March 2014
elections.

In September and October 2014, three long-running television shows, which
often discussed politics, economy, and society in the country, were taken off
the air.

The [first to go](http://www.ifj.org/nc/news-single-
view/backpid/34/article/serbia-b92-to-drop-critical-talk-show-amidst-
political-pressure/) was popular talk show “Impression of the Week” (“Utisak
nedelje”) created and hosted by journalist Olja Bećković, who had led the
program for over 20 years, since the Milošević era. Ms. Bećković has begun
openly speaking about [receiving telephone
calls](http://www.istinomer.rs/bonus/olja-beckovic-vucic-ovde-da-vise-nikad-
nisi-okrenula-moj-broj/) from Prime Minister Aleksandar Vučić, pressuring her
to change guests and topics on her show. In an interview with Al Jazeera
Balkans, Ms. Bećković expressed regret for not speaking out about direct
pressure from Vučić and his cabinet earlier and said, “Yes, he [Vučić] called
me.”

The next to fall was [“Sarapa's
Problem”](http://www.studiob.rs/tv/emisije.php?id=4), led and hosted by
popular journalist Predrag Sarapa on Belgrade's Studio B television. The
description of the show on Studio B's official website describes the show as:

> Emisija “Sarapin Problem” ima za cilj da aktuelizuje najuočljivije političke
> i društvene probleme, i to bez namere da ih rešava.[…] Cilj je upravo zbog
> toga da gosti različitog profila i opredeljenja ponude svoja rešenja.

> The show “Sarapa's Problem” has as its goal to actualize the most obvious
> political and social issues, without any intention to solve them.[…] The
> goal is, specifically because of this, for guests of different backgrounds
> and [political] tendencies to offer their solutions.

Studio B and others related to the state-owned television claim that Mr.
Sarapa's show, one of very few that discussed current political and social
topics, was taken off the air due to poor ratings. Journalists and Belgrade
residents gathered by the dozen the same day the show was taken off the air
and later by the hundred to protest this decision, while social media and
websites flooded with support for Mr. Sarapa's journalistic plight, which
since has been ironically dubbed “Sarapa's new problem”. Sarapa has also been
speaking out openly about the pressure placed on him and was quoted in a
[recent interview](http://www.dnevno.rs/vesti/srbija/143219-sarapa-cenzura-
vise-nije-relikt-proslosti-vec-sadasnjost-protiv-koje-se-treba-boriti.html)
saying,

> Censorship is no longer a relic of the past, it's the present that we must
> fight against.

The third to fall was another highly regarded investigative reporting show by
the name of “Insider”. The show, hosted by prominent Serbian investigative
journalist [Brankica
Stanković](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Brankica_Stankovi%C4%87), who has seen
more than her fair share of trouble over the years for reporting on organized
crime and political corruption in the country, was apparently pushed into
having to desist from airing the show. The independently produced show had a
long-standing collaboration with one of the national networks when network
executives insisted on new terms for renewal of their contract, including
preparing the show's new season for airing over a month earlier than planned.
As the show relies on investigative stories, the show's producers,
journalists, and host said they could not meet the deadlines that the network
insisted on and refused to produce a show of lesser quality.

In late October, just days after learning that her show no longer had a
contract with Serbia's national B92 network, Brankica Stanković was
[awarded](http://www.b92.net/eng/news/society.php?yyyy=2014&mm=10&dd=23&nav_id=91989)
the prestigious Courage in Journalism Award by the International Women’s Media
Foundation (IWMF) in New York. B92 network commended Ms. Stanković on the
award and wrote about it, but offered no new terms for renewal of their
contract with her and her team.

The Independent Journalists’ Association of Serbia and similar organizations
have complained time and again against these actions, calling attention to the
political pressure on Serbian journalists and demanding freedom of media and
rule of law, but to no avail. Officials in Serbia seem to prefer to keep their
voters entertained, rather than well informed about current political and
social events.

