[![General government consolidated gross debt as a percentage of GDP via
Randam CC-BY-3.0 ](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2014/09/Public_debt_as_percent_of_GDP_-
_Europe_major_economies-753x450.png)](http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Public_debt_as_percent_of_GDP_-
_Europe_major_economies.PNG)

General government consolidated gross debt as a percentage of GDP via Randam
CC-BY-3.0

Five years ago, France's public debt peaked at [80% of
GDP](http://www.insee.fr/en/themes/theme.asp?theme=16&sous_theme=3), but it is
now approaching a debt ratio of 100%. This conjecture puts France at risk of
being plunged into a difficult position in the financial markets. Governments
usually borrow by issuing securities, government bonds and bills. In layman's
terms, the more debt a country holds, the less money it's able to put away in
savings and reinvest in the nation's economy.

The burden of debt per capita is [30,300
euros](http://deshautsetdebats.wordpress.com/2012/10/30/pour-une-rvolution-
fiscale/). Last August, French debt exceeded the [symbolic threshold of 2
trillions euros](http://www.lefigaro.fr/flash-
eco/2014/09/16/97002-20140916FILWWW00338-la-dette-publique-frolera-100-de-pib-
en-2015.php), an increase of nearly 90 billion compared to January, a rise of
4.7%. The announcement came one week after the French National Institute for
Statistics and Economic Research ([INSEE](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/INSEE))
report, showing a second consecutive quarter of zero growth in France.

**Has France reached a critical threshold?**

The Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD) has already
warned of [“anaemic growth” and a risk of deflation in the
eurozone](http://www.liberation.fr/economie/2014/09/15/les-grandes-economies-
mondiales-ralentissent-la-zone-euro-decroche-selon-l-ocde_1100787). And now it
seems that French public debt could reach 98% of GDP by 2015. This increase
can be attributed to the rising deficit together with afeeble inflation and
growth. [Laurent
Bigorgne](http://www.lefigaro.fr/conjoncture/2014/08/20/20002-20140820ARTFIG00016-la-
dette-de-la-france-depasse-les-2000-milliards-d-euros.php), the director of
the economic think tank [Institut
Montaigne](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Institut_Montaigne), asserts[
that](http://www.lefigaro.fr/conjoncture/2014/08/20/20002-20140820ARTFIG00016-la-
dette-de-la-france-depasse-les-2000-milliards-d-euros.php):

> On ne peut anticiper aucune stabilisation de la dette, cette année, et même
> en 2015, elle devrait continuer de progresser dans les mêmes proportions.

> The debt is not expected to stabilize this year, or even in 2015, and is
> likely to continue to rise at the same rate.

That’s what’s in store for next year. Paris will join the club of countries
with three-figure debts. France will overtake Italy as the largest borrower on
the international markets, within the eurozone, which means that France will
find itself in a very precarious situation. With economic growth at a
standstill – tax revenues evaporating, and deficits increasing more than
expected – and at the same time almost zero inflation, its economy will take a
battering; this is a giant task for the Ministry of the Economy at Bercy to
tackle as it is unclear how this debt can be reduced.

Even though it remains a top priority, France is devoting more than[ 45
billion euros](http://economiepolitique.org/la-dette-publique-de-la-france/)
solely to paying back the interest on our loans, meaning that it will take all
the income tax revenues, for example, just to pay that interest. Reversing the
trend would require a return to robust growth; substantial cuts in public
expenditure; and a more dynamic European environment. However, there haven't
been many short-term developments in terms of these three issues. Bear in mind
that the OECD has just cut its growth forecast for the eurozone, particularly
France. In practical terms, therefore, France’s debt will increase even more,
probably by more than[ 70 billion euros next
year](http://fr.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dette_publique_de_la_France), ultimately
reaching 100% of GDP.

******Creditors are still a** **ccommodating**

Paradoxically, [France is currently borrowing at historically low
rates](http://www.boursier.com/actualites/economie/finances-la-dette-publique-
pourrait-froler-les-100-en-2015-25314.html); never before has it benefited
from such low borrowing costs. So France continues to accrue debt, even
borrowing at negative rates, and on short-term maturities. Just three days
ago, France raised €8 billion at negative rates, which is proof of the market
confidence in the country.

[70% of France’s public debt creditors – banks, pension funds, insurance
companies, and sovereign funds – are non-
resident](http://www.atlantico.fr/decryptage/dette-francaise-detenteurs-
creanciers-prives-opacite-chine-qatar-eric-verhaeghe-307685.html). Many of
these foreign creditors, however, reside within the eurozone. So 52% of
Germany’s and France’s debts are held within the eurozone and are euro-
denominated. The fact that the debt is held by foreign operators can be seen
as both a strength and a weakness.

On the plus side, it is proof of France's ability to attract investment; the
high scores given to France by the major rating agencies are a reflection of
market confidence in the country; the down side is that a high level of debt
held by non-residents means that the country is susceptible to international
conjecture – as with Greece during the sovereign debt crisis – which could
lead to an explosion in interest rates and greater problems with borrowing on
the markets.

It is true that France is benefiting from an extraordinary financial
environment, and borrowing at low rates. But can this last?

