![Right to Report campaign image by Committee to Protect Journalists. Free for
reuse.](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2014/09/right_to_report-campaign.jpg)

Right to Report campaign image by Committee to Protect Journalists. Free for
reuse.

Global Voices is joining more than 60 other media and press freedom
organizations in supporting the Committee to Protect Journalists’ campaign for
the [Right to Report in the Digital Age](https://cpj.org/campaigns/digital-
freedom/right-to-report-journalists-surveillance-prosecution.php), targeting
the Obama administration. Revelations about surveillance, intimidation, and
exploitation of the press have raised unsettling questions about the rights
and safety of journalists’ ability to report in the digital age. The
revelations also give ammunition to governments seeking to tighten
restrictions on media and the Internet.

Although the petition is directed at Obama, journalists around the world are
affected, both directly and indirectly. Reports that the NSA and allied [spy
agencies](https://firstlook.org/theintercept/2014/02/18/snowden-docs-reveal-
covert-surveillance-and-pressure-tactics-aimed-at-wikileaks-and-its-
supporters/) [surveilled journalists](https://www.aclu.org/human-rights-
national-security/report-finds-nsa-surveillance-harming-journalism-and-
law)–including a report that the [NSA hacked Al-
Jazeera](http://www.spiegel.de/international/world/nsa-spied-on-al-jazeera-
communications-snowden-document-a-919681.html)–create a chilling effect on the
press. Border crossing has long posed a risk for journalists, especially with
respect to the [search of electronic
devices](https://www.cpj.org/blog/2013/10/knowing-how-law-and-technology-meet-
at-us-borders.php).

Recent revelations about mass surveillance of online platforms in
[Egypt](https://advocacy.globalvoicesonline.org/2014/06/09/get-the-facts-
egypt-ramps-up-digital-surveillance/) and [the
UK](http://www.theguardian.com/uk/2013/jun/21/gchq-cables-secret-world-
communications-nsa?INTCMP=SRCH), surveillance of journalists in
[Ethiopia](https://citizenlab.org/2014/02/hacking-team-targeting-ethiopian-
journalists/), and harassment of journalists and whistleblowers around the
world (often under the auspices of anti-state charges) underscore the fact
that the issues raised in the Right to Report campaign are borderless. From
[Azerbaijan](https://advocacy.globalvoicesonline.org/2013/12/30/a-different-
kind-of-free-speech/) to
[Zambia](https://advocacy.globalvoicesonline.org/categories/regions-
countries/zambia/), governments are targeting journalists with communications
surveillance and need little excuse to continue doing so. The NSA spying
revelations unquestionably undercut the US government’s legitimacy in arguing
to the contrary.

“In Pakistan, where freedom of expression is largely perceived as a Western
notion, the Snowden revelations have had a damaging effect,” [Sana
Saleem](https://twitter.com/sanasaleem), director of the Pakistani digital
rights group Bolo Bhi and an author for Global Voices, wrote in a [recent blog
post](%22https://www.cpj.org/blog/2014/06/a-year-after-) for CPJ. “From the
policy landscape to the public narrative regarding free speech and privacy,
the Snowden revelations have strengthened the state's argument for
surveillance.”

The first stage in the campaign is an open
[petition](https://cpj.org/campaigns/digital-freedom/right-to-report-sign-
petition.php). The campaign seeks three key commitments from the Obama
administration:

  * Issue a presidential policy directive prohibiting the hacking and surveillance of journalists and media organizations.
  * Limit aggressive prosecutions that ensnare journalists and intimidate whistleblowers.
  * Prevent the harassment of journalists at the U.S. border.

Dozens of leading media outlets from the Associated Press to Huffington Post
to Vice News, along with professional journalist associations such as the Arab
Reporters for Investigative Journalism and the Society of Professional
Journalists, and global and national rights groups like Amnesty, Human Rights
Watch, and IFEX are all lending their support to the campaign.

Prominent journalists from around the world including Christiane Amanpour,
Arianna Huffington, Xiao Qiang and Ahmed Rashid have also [signed
on](https://cpj.org/campaigns/digital-freedom/right-to-report-sign-
petition.php) to show their support, as well as hundreds of other journalists,
bloggers and citizens who recognize that US surveillance and harassment of
journalists has an impact beyond national borders.

### How can you support CPJ’s #RightToReport in the Digital Age Campaign?

  * Sign the Right to Report in the Digital Age [petition](http://cpj.org/campaigns/digital-freedom/right-to-report-sign-petition.php)
  * Encourage your colleagues, members and network to sign the [petition](http://cpj.org/campaigns/digital-freedom/right-to-report-sign-petition.php) and support the[ #RightToReport](https://www.cpj.org/campaigns/digital-freedom/right-to-report-journalists-surveillance-prosecution.php).
  * Share your support for the [petition](http://cpj.org/campaigns/digital-freedom/right-to-report-sign-petition.php) on your social networks
  * Like [The Right to Report Facebook page](https://www.facebook.com/therighttoreport) to stay updated 
  * If you represent an organization that wants to support the campaign, send your logo to RightToReport@cpj.org and we will add it to the website

Visit CPJ’s Right to Report campaign page to learn more about the effort and
find ways to get involved.

