[![BvdN4gFCUAAQDvg](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2014/08/BvdN4gFCUAAQDvg.jpg)](https://twitter.com/ThisIsGaZa/status/501955518470967297/photo/1)

Child arrives at a Gaza hospital for treatment. Uploaded by Twitter user
@ThisisGaza on August 19.

Dozens of Gazans have been killed in another round of Israeli airstrikes in
the war-battered strip after peace negotiations between Israel and Hamas, a
group that has ruled Gaza since 2007 under a [seven-year blockade from
Israel](http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/worldnews/middleeast/10988692/Unless-
Israel-lifts-its-blockade-of-Gaza-no-ceasefire-can-work.html), broke down.

Yet again, both Hamas and Israel are exchanging blame for the failure of their
‘peace’ talks. Rockets launched from Gaza exploded near Be'er Sheva in
southern Israel, [causing neither injury nor
damage](http://www.israelnationalnews.com/News/News.aspx/184196).

Among the neighborhoods in Gaza that were bombed were Khan Younis, Beit Hanoun
— [which was visited by American journalist Max Blumenthal a few days
ago](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2014/08/16/journalists-visit-gaza-tweet-
images-of-a-devastated-city/) — and Shujaiya, site of the[ July 20
massacre](http://electronicintifada.net/blogs/shahd-abusalama/watch-al-
jazeeras-massacre-dawn-gives-glimpse-horror-shujaiya), which killed at least
65 Palestinians.

Since Israel began its assault on Gaza on July 8, more than 2,000 people have
been killed, and Israel and Hamas have committed to six ceasefires. The first
three ceasefires collapsed within hours. The latest ceasefire held for five
days, offering Gazans the biggest break since the military offensive started.

This time, Israeli and Palestinian factions met in Cairo for[ another round of
talks](http://america.aljazeera.com/articles/2014/8/10/gaza-truce-up-
intheairaspalestinianteenkilledinhebron.html). Hamas wants Israel to lift the
seven-year blockade. They also want the release of about 125 key political
prisoners held in Israeli military prisons. Israel demands include an end to
rocket attacks, the demilitarization of Gaza and disarmament of Hamas.

While Israel accused Hamas of breaching this ceasefire, Hamas [told Ma'an News
Agency](http://www.maannews.net/eng/ViewDetails.aspx?ID=722109), an
independent news site in Palestine, that Israel “ended the truce and claimed
that three rockets hit Israel, which Hamas had no information about”, hinting
that the three rockets might have been launched by one of the other
Palestinian militant factions involved in this conflict.

Within an hour of the end of negotiations, an Israeli airstrike hit the Al-
Dalou home in Gaza City's Sheikh Radwan neighborhood. Hamas official Mousa Abu
Marzuk [told Reuteurs](http://www.reuters.com/article/2014/07/15/us-
palestinians-israel-idUSKBN0FI04420140715) that the strike on the Al-Dalou
home was an assassination attempt against Muhammad Deif, head of Hamas’
military wing, the Al-Qassam Brigade, in Gaza. While western media, notably
[Fox News](http://www.foxnews.com/world/2014/08/20/israel-targets-hamas-
commander-as-gaza-descends-into-violence/), immediately claimed that Deif had
been killed, that claim was immediately dismissed by Hamas’ [Al-Aqsa
Radio](https://twitter.com/MaxBlumenthal/status/502126947401363459). The
strike on Deif's house [killed Deif's wife and
child](http://www.smh.com.au/world/hamas-military-chief-mohammed-deifs-wife-
child-die-in-israeli-airstrike-on-gaza-20140820-1065cz.html). The same home
[was targeted in 2012](http://972mag.com/israeli-airstrikes-kill-three-in-
gaza-rockets-fired-at-israel-as-ceasefire-breaks-down/95756/) during Israel's
last offensive in Gaza, killing 12.

At the time of writing, the death toll stood at 2,039, including 540 children
and 75 families. Seventy-two percent of Palestinians killed in this offensive
are civilians, according[ to the
UN](http://www.ochaopt.org/documents/ocha_opt_sitrep_15_08_2014.pdf). Israel
has bombed residential neighborhoods, schools, a playground, hospitals,
shelters and refugee camps. Some estimates say [40 percent of Gaza's urban
area](http://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/aug/03/gaza-not-as-
expected-amid-terror-hope?CMP=twt_gu) has been reduced to rubble. Israel
attacked the only power plant in Gaza on July 28, plunging the congested strip
of 1.8 million people into darkness while putting its limited water and
sanitation infrastructure under crippling stress.

As to the reason for the failure of the Cairo talks, Israel accuses Hamas of
terrorism while Hamas accused Israel of failing to uphold its own promised
commitments. As Ma'an agency
[reported](http://www.maannews.net/eng/ViewDetails.aspx?ID=722137), “the
Palestinian negotiations delegation has repeatedly demanded that a lasting
ceasefire will only come through the lifting of Israel's eight-year siege of
the Gaza Strip,” a siege considered illegal under international law, [labeled
by the International Committee of the Red
Cross](http://www.icrc.org/web/eng/siteeng0.nsf/htmlall/palestine-
update-140610) as “a collective punishment imposed in clear violation of
Israel's obligations under international humanitarian law”.

Most of the world and the United Nations considers Gaza and the West Bank
[occupied](http://www.ohchr.org/en/countries/menaregion/pages/psindex.aspx) by
Israel. This is Israel's third military operation in Gaza in six years.

**_[Follow our in-depth coverage: #Gaza: Civilian Death Toll Mounts in Israeli
Offensive](https://globalvoicesonline.org/specialcoverage/gaza-civilian-death-
toll-mounts-in-israeli-offensive/)_**

