![Could Russia's regulatory push online include new restrictions on news-
aggregation websites like Yandex?](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2014/05/putinbow-800x352.jpg)

Could Russia's regulatory push online include new restrictions on news-
aggregation websites like Yandex? Images mixed by author.

The next time you pass a newsstand, consider the person who determined what
publications would be displayed. The newsstand operator tries to appeal to
passersby with a snapshot of what’s occurring in the world. When news
aggregation occurs on a street corner, it’s a fairly simple business
enterprise. When it happens on the Internet, some people in the Russian
government, maybe Vladimir Putin included, are ready to treat it like a mass
media undertaking.

Russian lawmakers are taking [steps](http://tjournal.ru/paper/yandex-gosduma)
to classify news-aggregating websites as mass media, which would require
companies like Yandex to register with the government and face stricter
regulations. This latest legislative initiative responds to comments Putin
made at a public forum in April 2014, when pro-Kremlin blogger Viktor Levanov
[asked](http://kremlin.ru/news/20858) the President how the state defines
Yandex’s [news-aggregation service](http://news.yandex.ru/). Levanov expressed
concern that millions of people visit Yandex every day, where they see the
website’s list of the “top five” news stories. Putin promised that the
government was investigating the legal status of such online services, and
would soon come to a decision.

Members of the Russian parliament seem to have read in Putin’s remarks not a
“wait-and-see” message, but a call to action. On May 13, Duma Deputy Andrei
Lugovoi asked the Attorney General to issue a ruling about whether Yandex is
in fact part of the mass media. An answer is expected by mid-June. Reporting
on the story, Russian newspaper RBC
[quotes](http://top.rbc.ru/society/29/05/2014/926942.shtml) several state
officials who argue that Yandex must either part with its news-aggregation
service, or accept the status (and restrictions) of mass media.

Apparent in many of the comments by government authorities is a blatant
misunderstanding of how Yandex News [actually
works](http://help.yandex.ru/news/resources/About-News.pdf).

Yandex News is indeed intensely popular. Between May 2008 and March 2014, the
service’s [average daily
visitors](http://stat.yandex.ru/stats.xml?ProjectID=14&ReportID=-225&Age=m&SMonth=05&FMonth=03&SYear=2008&FYear=2014&SDay=1&FDay=31&alltime=1)
in Russia rose from about 600 thousand to 5.9 million. Yandex’s home page,
which displays any moment’s “top 5” trending news articles, now attracts over
[22 million
people](http://stat.yandex.ru/stats.xml?ProjectID=132&ReportID=-225&Age=m&SMonth=05&FMonth=03&SYear=2008&FYear=2014&SDay=1&FDay=31&alltime=1)
every day. Yandex, however, produces no original content. Moreover, the
aggregation process, according to its designers, is entirely automated. Nobody
at Yandex is writing anything. Nobody is even handpicking anything. Algorithms
are responsible for everything found on the website.

[![The tremendous growth of average daily visitors to Yandex's news
aggregation service.](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2014/05/Screen-
Shot-2014-05-30-at-1.41.26-AM.png)](http://stat.yandex.ru/stats.xml?ProjectID=14&ReportID=-225&Age=m&SMonth=05&FMonth=03&SYear=2008&FYear=2014&SDay=1&FDay=31&alltime=1)

The tremendous growth of average daily visitors to Yandex's news aggregation
service. May 2008 to March 2014.

Many in the Russian government, however, either fail to comprehend this, or
refuse to believe it. Seemingly, state officials and pro-Kremlin activists are
inclined to view the popularity of “bad news” in Russia as an editorial ploy
to turn the public against the government. Yandex is no stranger to such
paranoia. One of the most frequently asked questions featured in Yandex’s help
section [asks](http://help.yandex.ru/news/qanda.xml#negative-news), “Why is
all the aggregated news so negative?” (Yandex’s answer is that aggregated news
is negative when most individual news stories are negative.)

Curiously, Google’s news-aggregation service seems not to interest Russian
lawmakers. RBC quotes an anonymous source in United Russia, the country’s
ruling political party, who claims that Google doesn’t curate news articles.
While the service is perhaps more primitive than what Yandex offers, Google
does in fact [aggregate Russian news](https://news.google.ru). There is even a
feature called “[Editors’
Picks](https://support.google.com/news/answer/1004865?hl=en)” that allows
publishers to handpick particular content.

According to [reports](http://top.rbc.ru/society/29/05/2014/926942.shtml), the
Attorney General is expected to rule that Yandex’s news service does indeed
constitute a mass media outlet. Once that determination is made public,
Lugovoi or some other Duma deputy is likely to sponsor new legislation that
would formalize the legal obligations of news aggregators like Yandex.

Could new regulations pressure Yandex into abandoning news aggregation
altogether? Probably not. In 2013, Yandex earned more than 891 million dollars
in advertising revenue—much of it from its News portal.

