[![Vladimir Putin speaks to the press at a conference in Minsk, April 29,
2014, Kremlin photo service, public
domain.](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2014/04/putincenter.jpeg)](http://kremlin.ru/photo/3442?page=1)

Vladimir Putin speaks to the press at a conference in Minsk, April 29, 2014,
Kremlin photo service, public domain.

Over the past two years, the Russian government has armed itself to the teeth
with regulatory powers that enable nearly every conceivable form of Internet
censorship. In the summer of 2012, the state created a federal registry, where
it can [blacklist](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2012/07/10/russia-a-great-
firewall-to-censor-the-runet/) any website or entire web domain for hosting
content deemed to be harmful to minors. Earlier this year, the Attorney
General gained the right to add to the registry extrajudicially any Web
address guilty of encouraging “extremism.” Just this week, on April 29, 2014,
the upper house of the parliament passed a series of [“anti-terrorist”
laws](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2014/01/16/russias-parliament-prepares-
new-anti-terrorist-laws-for-internet/) that further expand the authorities’
powers online. After President Putin signs the legislation, anonymous crowd-
funding will face stricter regulations, websites like Facebook and Twitter
must store data-archives on Russian soil (where the Kremlin can pry more
easily), and “popular” bloggers will be registered and subjected to
regulations like those imposed on organized mass media.

**The RuNet paradox**

Today, should the authorities wish to shut down a website or silence an
individual blogger, the government has many options. For some reason, however,
lawmakers continue to add new powers to the state’s censorship utility-belt,
as though the current panoply of Internet controls weren’t enough. In other
words, Russian Internet policy is something of a paradox. The parliament keeps
passing laws that would pave the way to a wholehearted crackdown, but the
scope of actual censorship remains narrow.

Since February, Russia’s Attorney General has
[added](http://antizapret.info/org.php?id=5) more than a hundred websites to
the federal blacklist,
[including](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2014/03/13/russia-blocks-four-
opposition-media-portals/) the well-known (but relatively low-trafficked)
opposition news portals Grani.ru, Kasparov.ru, and EJ.ru. Additionally,
prosectuors have banned several websites belonging to Russia’s most prominent
political blogger, Alexey Navalny, who is also under house arrest in the
offline world.

There are dozens of more prominent independent websites than the three
targeted by the authorities, however, and it’s necessary to study the
Kremlin’s wider attack on Navalny, in order to understand why he’s been
singled out online. That said, the Russian establishment certainly has not
shied from stirring up trouble on the Internet, where Kremlin-friendly
oligarchs have interfered with media outlets like
[Gazeta.ru](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2013/03/05/why-do-russias-newsmen-
keep-quitting/), [Lenta.ru](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2014/03/12/russias-
best-news-portal-decimated/), and
[DozhdTV](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2014/01/28/so-long-to-russias-only-
independent-tv-station/), and [forced into
emigration](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2014/04/29/from-igor-sechin-to-
dick-cheney-the-end-of-russias-zuckerberg/) the creator and CEO of the
country’s largest social network. These intrusions on Internet freedom,
however, have come in the familiar form of backroom machinations, where
meddling shareholders, layoffs, and private phone calls intervene against
independent-minded troublemakers.

Yet, despite the apparent reliability of micromanaging the Russian media with
traditional pressures, lawmakers this week are signaling their interest in yet
another wave of Internet regulations. The new proposals, still in the early
development stage, would grant the state powers that are drastic, even in
comparison to the recent “anti-terrorism” package.

**The Kremlin isn't finished**

The first suggestion belongs to Senator Maksim Kavdzharadze, who is calling on
Russia to institute its own Internet
[separate](http://www.kommersant.ru/doc/2462798) from the United States and
Europe. Citing security concerns about Western surveillance, Kavdzharadze
warns that “everyone [in Russia] has joined social networks, where they tell
where they’ve been and where they’re going.” Kavdzharadze’s proposal has
attracted special attention not so much for its outlandishness as what he
suggests calling the all-Russian Internet: “Cheburashka,” the name of a
beloved Soviet cartoon character. (The next day, clearly unnerved by the
public response, the Senator
[modified](http://www.mk.ru/politics/2014/04/28/sozdanie-vnutrirossiyskogo-
interneta-ne-pomozhet-v-borbe-so-shpionami.html) his comments to say that he
does not support a digital “Iron Curtain.”)

While the public laughed about Kavdzharadze’s dreams of Internet autarky
(pausing to visit YouTube and enjoy a few clips of old Soviet animation),
Kommersant newspaper published a [story](http://www.kommersant.ru/doc/2462760)
about another, seemingly far more serious government initiative. According to
the paper’s anonymous sources, a Kremlin working group is drafting new
regulations that would grant the state, what reporters describe as, “total
control” over the Internet.

The plan would force Internet-providers to use DNS servers located inside
Russia, allowing the government to manage the way URL addresses match to IP
addresses, making it possible to disrupt the way Internet users access
websites. Officials would also institute a tiered system for all online data
transfers, barring “local” and “regional” networks from interacting with
networks located abroad. At all levels of the Internet, the government intends
to “filter content” (though Kommersant’s report does not specify what exactly
would be targeted). Finally, the working group proposes transferring the
duties of the [Coordination Center for the .RU and .РФ
domains](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Coordination_Center_for_TLD_RU) to an
agency inside the Kremlin, laying the foundation for greater state control
over what could become privileged domains inside Russia.

**All dressed up with nobody to censor?**

Last week, Vladimir Putin seemed to endorse the explosion in Internet controls
in Russia, telling a group of journalists that the Web “[began as a CIA
project](http://kremlin.ru/news/20858)” and “continues to develop this way.”
He also claimed that Yandex, Russia’s leading search engine, faced unfair
pressure from Americans and Europeans, when it first emerged, complaining that
the company was forced to accept foreigners into its leadership, in order to
survive in the tech industry. According to Forbes Russia columnist Leonid
Bershidsky, however, Putin’s remarks about Yandex are
[inaccurate](http://www.forbes.ru/mneniya-column/vertikal/255787-yandeks-
putina-pochemu-prezidenta-vse-proshche-lovit-na-oshibkakh). In fact,
Bershidsky says, the Kremlin has bullied Russia’s Internet search giant worst
of all.

The Russian government’s accumulation of online censorship tools resembles an
arms race. So far, the Kremlin has refrained from unloading its full arsenal
on the country’s [nearly 100
million](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_countries_by_number_of_Internet_users)
Internet users. Yes, there have been isolated attacks on information freedom,
as the Attorney General’s persecution of Navalny and several news portals
attests, but the RuNet’s general independence survives, for the most part,
albeit unsteadily. If this is indeed an arms race, however, the Kremlin might
one day soon decide that it’s well enough equipped to snuff out the political
threat inherent in a free RuNet.

Should that moment arrive, Russia would become a very different place.

