![America's shortcomings in the information war over Ukraine. Images mixed by
author.](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2014/04/unclered-800x494.jpg)

America's shortcomings in the information war over Ukraine. Images mixed by
author.

Tensions are high in eastern Ukraine, where the first bullets are flying in
what could become a major armed conflict. The violence might be only starting,
but an information war between Russia and the West has raged for months now.
Clearly frustrated with Moscow’s actions in eastern Ukraine, the US State
Department openly
[denounced](http://www.state.gov/r/pa/prs/ps/2014/04/224759.htm) Russian
propaganda yesterday, April 13, 2014, listing ten “false claims about Ukraine”
by the Kremlin. The American government published a [similar
list](http://www.state.gov/r/pa/prs/ps/2014/03/222988.htm) last month, on
March 4, criticizing Russian claims about Crimea.

The biggest audience for “the Russian propaganda machine,” as the State
Department calls it, is undoubtedly Russia's own population. US officials
showed little interest in appealing to Russian speakers, however, publishing
both lists in English only. There appears to be no official Russian
translation of the press release, though several media outlets have summarized
the text in [Russian](http://top.rbc.ru/politics/14/04/2014/917650.shtml) and
[Ukrainian](http://www.bbc.co.uk/ukrainian/politics/2014/04/140414_usa_state_dep_russia.shtml).
The US Russian embassy’s official Twitter account, which has over 21 thousand
followers, did post a link to the “ten false claims,” though just 15 people
[retweeted](https://twitter.com/USEmbRu/status/455707659967430656) it.

Unsurprisingly, given the document’s unavailability in Russian, the State
Department’s myth-busting announcement got little reaction from Russians.
While Russian newspapers’ summaries about the US press release have attracted
some reposts on Twitter and other online networks, most original feedback from
Russian bloggers is decidedly negative. Many objections focus on the State
Department’s implication that “Russian agents” are active in Ukraine. In what
has become a familiar practice in the dispute about combatants’ origins,
bloggers endlessly [dissect photographs](http://vasya-
kisa.livejournal.com/5517.html) of the armed men in Ukrainian cities, debating
whether someone’s rifle, vest, helmet, or who-knows-what-else reveals his true
identity.

Of the Russian Internet users who reject the State Department’s comments, most
seem content not to engage the report’s content at all, instead hurling abuse
at the US government in general terms. “The enemy has an amazing talent [for
lying],” [wrote](http://vasya-kisa.livejournal.com/5517.html) someone on
LiveJournal. “How’s the State Department’s head so full of shit?”
[asked](https://www.facebook.com/permalink.php?id=535251672&story_fbid=10151964821731673)
a Facebook user. “They lie with every breath,” another person
[wrote](https://www.facebook.com/igor.petrov.1213986/posts/739140156136030?comment_id=93676417&offset=0&total_comments=1),
adding, “At least our guys [in the Russian government] just keep quiet, but
these people [the Americans] lie.” One blogger on LiveJournal commented on the
State Department’s press release by
[arguing](http://vbulahtin.livejournal.com/703236.html) that the evidence of
Russian involvement in Ukraine is minimal, compared to the (supposed)
mountains of data that show the United States’ responsibility for a spike in
Afghan opium production. For that reason, he claims, “sanctions against the
USA make far more sense than another round of penalizing Russia.”

The US government’s recent outreach to Russian speakers about the events in
Ukraine has been clumsy, to say the least. On April 8, 2014, the US embassy in
Russia tweeted a link to a [news
story](http://echo.msk.ru/blog/echomsk/1295362-echo/) on Echo of Moscow’s
website about separatists in Kharkov confusing an opera house for the mayor’s
building. (The mistake, the report claims, reveals that the men were not
locals, which implies outside intervention.) The embassy added to its tweet a
hashtag that was supposed to say “the isolation of Russia,” but it misspelled
the word “Russia.” Astonishingly, no one has deleted the
[tweet](https://twitter.com/USEmbRu/statuses/453449699719380992). (It is still
online and available today). Within hours, Russia’s Foreign Ministry
[posted](https://www.facebook.com/MIDRussia/photos/a.265191980246917.43849.264205757012206/475713855861394/?type=1&stream_ref=10)
on Facebook a photograph of the misspelling, mocking the error and offering
language assistance with any future “propaganda materials.”

Up to the present, votes in international institutions about the annexation of
Crimea suggest that countries are likelier to sympathize with Ukraine and the
United States than with Russia. As far as ordinary Russians are concerned,
however, the Americans are waging a lousy information war.

