Inspired by Brandon Stanton's [Humans of New
York](http://www.humansofnewyork.com/) (HONY), Nina Steinberg has created a
Facebook page [Humans of Ethiopia](https://www.facebook.com/HumansOfEthiopia)
that provides glimpses into people's lives in Ethiopia.

The description [reads](https://www.facebook.com/HumansOfEthiopia/info):

> As I explore Ethiopia this summer I have decided to create a space where I
> can share my glimpses into the lives of strangers, new friends, and the
> fascinating way of life I am coming to understand here. Inspired by
> Brandon's Humans of New York.

Take a look at a few photographs republished from the Humans of Ethiopia page.

![Weaving. Photo by Humans of Ethiopia. ](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2013/12/Ethiopia-7.jpg)

Traditional cloth weaving is a centuries-old tradition in Ethiopia. Photo by
Humans of Ethiopia. Used with permission.

![Camouflage](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2013/12/Ethiopia-5-800x532.jpg)

Ethiopian soldiers walking in an empty street. Photo by Humans of Ethiopia.
Used with permission.

![Ethiopian women carrying wood on their back. Photo by Humans of Ethiopia.
](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-content/uploads/2013/12/ethipia-2.jpg)

Ethiopian women carry wood on their backs to make a living. The load they
carry goes up to 70 pounds and the hike distances that can be more or less
than 18 miles. Some of these women may even weigh less than the load they are
carrying. Their average daily income is less than two US dollars. Photo by
Humans of Ethiopia. Used with permission.

![Ready for Ethiopia coffee ceremony. Photo by Humans of Ethiopia.
](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-content/uploads/2013/12/Ethiopia-6.jpg)

An Ethiopian coffee ceremony is a beautiful ritualized way of drinking coffee.
The green coffee beans are roasted and then the pan is walked around the room
so that everyone can get a waft of the coffee aroma. The coffee beans are
crushed, mortar-and-pestle style. The coffee powder is then boiled in a clay
pot called a Jebena (seen in the left of the photo). Finally, the coffee is
poured into little china cups on a tray and served to everyone – it is served
three times. Photo by Humans of Ethiopia. Used with permission.

![I caught them waving chat at the goat and laughed at the thought of a goat
getting high. But when I came over to snap a photo, the father wouldn’t smile
until he clarified that he was only feeding the goat chat… not his precious
little girl. Photo by Humans of Ethiopia.](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2013/12/Ethiopia-4-200x200.jpg)

I caught them waving chat at the goat and laughed at the thought of a goat
getting high. But when I came over to snap a photo, the father wouldn’t smile
until he clarified that he was only feeding the goat chat… not his precious
little girl. Photo by Humans of Ethiopia. Used with permission.

![Eat at facefood. Photo by Humans of Ethiopia.
](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-content/uploads/2013/12/ethiopia-8.jpg)

Eat at facefood. Photo by Humans of Ethiopia. Used with permission.

![“The purest and most thoughtful minds are those which love color the most.”
-John Ruskin, The Stones of Venice. Photo by Humans of Ethiopia.
](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2013/12/Ethiopia-1-200x200.jpg)

    “The purest and most thoughtful minds are those which love color the most.”  
-John Ruskin, The Stones of Venice. Photo by Humans of Ethiopia. Used with permission.

!["I designed and made what I'm wearing." - Salam Nigussie. Photo by Humans of
Ethiopia. ](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2013/12/Ethiopia-3-200x200.jpg)

Ethiopian designer, Salam Nigussie, showing off her product: “I designed and
made what I'm wearing.” – Salam Nigussie. Photo by Humans of Ethiopia. Used
with permission.

