![Philip Ogola - Kenya Red Cross](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2013/09/Ogola_PRI-800x450.jpg)

Philip Ogola runs Kenya Red Cross's social media command center from his desk
in Nairobi. Credit: Valerie Hamilton (used with permission from PRI.org)

_This[article and a radio report](http://pri.org/stories/2013-09-24/when-
theres-no-911-kenya-tweets-help) by Valerie Hamilton for The World originally
appeared on [PRI.org ](http://PRI.org/)on September 24, 2013 and is
republished as part of a content sharing agreement._

When al-Shabab gunmen attacked Nairobi's Westgate Mall, Philip Ogola jumped to
action – with a tweet.

> WARNING : Avoid [@WestgateMallKe](https://twitter.com/WestgateMallKe) in
> Weslands Heavy shootout reported
> [#RedCross](https://twitter.com/search?q=%23RedCross&src=hash) Ambulance
> [@EMS_Kenya](https://twitter.com/EMS_Kenya) at scene ^PO
>
> — Kenya Red Cross (@KenyaRedCross) [September 21,
> 2013](https://twitter.com/KenyaRedCross/statuses/381363166115926017)

Ogola runs the Kenya Red Cross's social media command center, a cluster of
computer screens at Red Cross headquarters in Nairobi. It's where I visited
him earlier this month, before the attacks.

In the last year, Ogola has turned Kenya Red Cross social media into a virtual
911 [emergency phone number in North America], taking in information about
emergencies and putting out public safety bulletins, 24 hours a day.

“The information I get online, it's amazing,” says Ogola. “You get the exact
location of where the incident is, you get photos, how many people injured,
where, and how far. Previously it was really hard.”

Ogola says he has helped coordinate response to hundreds of emergencies,
liaising with social media users on the scene and emergency services
countrywide. All with the help of ordinary Kenyans on their mobile phones.

“Kenyans thought, ‘Whoa, I can actually save someone's life with a touch of a
button,'” he says. “And it went viral.”

Here's how it works: you see an accident, a shooting, or a fire; you tweet, or
Facebook, or text Kenya Red Cross. Ogola does a cloud search, scanning social
media for photos, location tags or other information on the same incident.
Within minutes, he hands it over to first responders on the ground.

“If we get a security tweet we forward it to the police. If we get a fire
alert about a building burning, we forward it to the fire brigade, and we call
a backup team,” Ogola says. “We have actually become the reporting tool for
all kind of incidents. We never had any reporting tool in Kenya.”

Kenya's public emergency services are notoriously threadbare. What started as
a small fire at Jomo Kenyatta International Airport this summer gutted a
terminal before firefighters got it under control. There's no national
911-type number for medical crises, and no comprehensive national disaster
plan.

But thousands of Kenyans are plugged into Red Cross social media, through
their mobile phones and tweet-to-text services. In emergencies, often, the Red
Cross is their first call.

“Even the government sometimes falls back on us instead of having their own
systems in place,” says Joanne Gitau, an ambulance dispatcher for Red Cross
EMTs, “especially when the emergencies occur on a really large scale.”

The terror attack on the Westgate mall was Kenya's biggest crisis since the
1998 embassy bombings. Red Cross, and social media, have been on the front
lines. Over Skype a few days after the attacks, Philip Ogola told me about
people who were trapped inside, tweeting the Red Cross for help.

“I was getting tweets from guys in the basement parking. I was getting tweets
from the injured. I was getting tweets from guys who were hiding in the
building,” he says. “I was getting tweets from the public, saying, ‘My mom is
inside.'”

Ogola set up a hashtag, #RedCrossTrace, to help match tweets from Westgate
with worried loved ones outside. From his iPad at the triage station outside
the mall, he put out updates about casualties, first aid, missing persons, and
counseling services, and helped organize an unprecedented nationwide blood
drive.

Now, Twitter has been buzzing with posts calling him a hero. He says he
couldn't have done it without social media.

“It would have been totally impossible to comprehend the situation on the
ground, to know the needs of the people, to actually even publish information
of what we need. It was easy for me to tweet and say, ‘Hey guys, we need
syringes, we need gauzes, we need water.’ And the ripple effect was
instantaneous.”

Kenya Red Cross has more than 100,000 followers on Twitter, and 26,000 on
Facebook. On a normal day, Ogola says, his posts and reposts reach 5 million
people.

Since the Westgate attack, he says, they've gone viral, reaching 50 million,
around the globe.

**Links**

  * [Youtube: Phillip Ogola on Using Socia Media during Emergencies](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=adjxYMZOx5M)
  * [“Twitter Rescue: Red Cross’ iVolunteer saves lives”](http://www.standardmedia.co.ke/?articleID=2000058407)
  * [Kenya Red Cross website](https://www.kenyaredcross.org/)
  * [Philip Ogola on Twitter](https://twitter.com/kenyaredcross)

