_This story by Ana Aranha was originally titled[Vidas em
Trânsito](http://www.apublica.org/amazoniapublica/madeira/vidas-em-
transito-2/) (“Lives in Transit”) and is part of Brazilian investigative
journalism agency Pública's special coverage
_[#](http://apublica.org/amazoniapublica/)
_[AmazôniaPública](http://apublica.org/amazoniapublica/), which reports on the
impact of mega-construction projects in the Amazon along the Madeira river in
the state of Rondônia, Brazil. __The story will be published in a series of
five posts on Global Voices Online._

_Previous post:_ _[Residents Displaced by Brazilian Power Plant Struggle to
Earn Living  
](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2013/04/16/residents-displaced-by-brazilian-
power-plant-struggle-to-earn-living/) Next post: [Uprooted by Brazilian Power
Plant, River Residents Try to
Rebuild](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2013/05/15/residents-uprooted-by-
brazilian-power-plant-rebuild-river-homes/)_

When the company [Energia
Sustentável](http://www.energiasustentaveldobrasil.com.br/?lg=2) (Sustainable
Energy) removed people from their homes in the area surrounding the Madeira
River in order to flood it as part of construction of a power plant, it did so
promising the displaced residents that it would provide them with a new place
to live.

The company built the town of New Mutum Paraná to be the home for engineers
and people in charge of the Jirau power plant, but also to receive former
residents of Old Mutum.

But many now accuse the company of going back on its promises. Sônia Cabral
Costa, who owns a clothing store in New Mutum now, argues:

> Eles prometeram que aqui ia ter faculdade, indústrias, milhares de empregos.
> Cadê? Nada disso foi cumprido. Essas pessoas tinham sua fonte de renda,
> vieram acreditando no que a empresa prometeu.

> They promised there would be a university, factories, and thousands of jobs
> here. Where are they? None of these promises were met. Those people had an
> income source, they came here believing in what the company had promised.

The initial estimates by the power plant [in the Madeira river hydroelectric
complex], were the removal of 2,849 people, 1,087 in the flooded area by Jirau
and 1,762 by the [Santo Antônio
dam](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Santo_Ant%C3%B4nio_Dam) [by the company
[Santo Antônio
Energia](http://www.santoantonioenergia.com.br/site/portal_mesa/pt/home/home.aspx)].
According the [Movimento do Atingidos por
Barragens](http://www.mabnacional.org.br/) (Affected by the Dam's Movement),
there are 4,325 people today that were removed or indirectly affected by the
dams.

This year, Sônia's nephew graduates from elementary school. Next year, he will
be forced to travel 30 kilometers every day to study in Jaci Paraná. Among the
promises from Energia Sustentável was the construction of two schools in the
village, an elementary school and a high school. As a matter of fact, the two
schools were built. But one of them is now a private school.

Hanging from the door of Einstein School, a sign with the plant's and the
federal government's logos reads in big letters that the school was built with
resources from the [Brazilian Development
Bank](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Brazilian_Development_Bank) (BNDES, in
Portuguese). However, only those who can pay a monthly fee of 240 Brazilian
reais (121 United States dollars) are admitted to the school. Or 200 reais
(100 US dollars), for sons or daughters of “camargueiros” – the way locals
call the employees of Brazilian construction company Camargo Corrêa.

While the private school has 20 students in each class, the public one has
more than 40 and has night shifts to meet the demand, the public school's vice
principal says:

> No ano passado, ficaram 230 alunos sem matrícula porque a gente não tinha
> vaga. Os pais vinham implorar na minha porta, mas não tinha onde colocar.

> Last year, 230 students weren't admitted because there wasn't any room.
> Their parents came to beg at my door, but there was nowhere I could place
> them.

[![Escola construída para comunidade de ribeirinhos que foi repassada para
grupo particular Foto: Marcelo Min](https://pt.globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2013/03/escola-
mutum.png)](http://www.apublica.org/amazoniapublica/madeira/vidas-em-
transito-2/)

School built for riverside community that was privatized Photo: Marcelo Min

“It was supposed to be run by the town hall, but they needed a school for the
sons and daughters of the engineers, so Jirau decided to negotiate with the
private sector. I don't see a problem here”, says Pedro Beber, responsible for
the management of the city hall's social compensation budget.

> Se eles estão pagando os professores, [o município] não tem interesse em
> assumir essa escola.

> If they are paying the teachers, [the town] is not interested is taking over
> the school.

Infrastructure problems are also common in other villages created by Jirau and
Santo Antônio to shelter the rural population that had to be removed. The most
frequent ones are related to the fertility of the soil, which affect their
production. Residents were removed from Madeira's riverfront, an area
naturally fertilized when the river rises, and were placed on land bought from
farmers, where some of them used to raise cattle.

Another common complaint relates to the sewage smell inside their houses. The
new settlements were built in regions near the areas flooded by the dam for
the plant. Due to the rise of the river's dammed up water, the water table
floods, causing leaks in drains and sinks.

[Project Amazônia
Pública](http://www.apublica.org/amazoniapublica/?page_id=19) is composed by
three teams of Agência Pública de Reportagem e Jornalismo Investigativo
reporters who travelled to three Amazon areas from July to October 2012 –
among which the hydroelectric plants along the Madeira river, in state of
Rondônia. All stories aim to explore the complexity of current local
investments in the Amazon, including negotiations and political articulations,
and to listen to all agents involved – governments, enterprises, civil society
– in order to frame the context in which these projects have been developed.
The key perspective of such stories, as well as Pública's entire production,
is the public interest: how do actions and political and economic negotiations
impact people's lives.

