[![](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2010/05/Reassi_Ouabonzi.jpg)](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2010/05/Reassi_Ouabonzi.jpg)

Réassi Ouabonzi

The [Best of blog Awards](http://www.thebobs.com/?s=1154893190771544ZWFAYZBB)
2010 shone light on a slew of fascinating blogs in 11 languages. A close
runner-up for the _Best blog in French_ award is [Chez
Gangoueus](http://gangoueus.blogspot.com/) (fr). Réassi Ouabonzi blogs about
African and diaspora literature in French from a reader's perspective since
2007, one book at a time. With time, Chez Gangoueus has developed into a
unique online guide to African and diaspora writers.

**GV : Why did you open a blog about books in the first place?**

I was an avid reader as a teen, I devoured every book available in the French
cultural center in Brazzaville (Congo), where I lived. I was born in France of
Congolese parents, I spent 18 years in each country, and now live in France.
Reading is time consuming, I dropped it during my studies in physics. Then,
one day, I saw _Beloved_ , a film by Jonathan Demme based on the book written
by Nobel Prize [Toni Morrison](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Toni_Morrison). It
gave me such a jolt I decided to read all of one her books. She brought me
back to reading.

**\- Why do you concentrate on black literature in French ?  
**

It was a deliberate process. I'm interested in reading how black people see
themselves and are represented. I opened a blog to document my readings, and
let's face it, also because it's quite a violent reality, not to find any
resources about African or black literature on the Francophone web, save for
the online magazine [Cultures Sud](http://www.culturessud.com/).

![](http://2.bp.blogspot.com/_kl-8Cz-
TJDI/S4AS1Wny_SI/AAAAAAAAB7Q/qKEHPa5Q_p8/s400/P1260004.JPG)

"Les écailles du ciel" by Tierno Monenembo

**\- What are the current trends in Francophone African literature?**

\- I review authors from any African countries, French West Indies or in
diasporas, black literature at large. But let me think: in Congo, a new
generation of writers is budding, inspired by award-wining writer and
intellectual [Alain Mabanckou](http://www.alainmabanckou.net/). In Sénégal,
I'm struck by the current emergence (empowering) of women writers, in the wake
of best selling author [Marie
Ndiaye](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Marie_NDiaye). I notice writers from
Cameroon write with the same “in your face” directness and energy that they
are are famous for. I must confess that I am in awe of Nigerian writers, like
the great [Chinua Achebe](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Chinua_Achebe). Among
francophone writers, I could mention so many: [Abdourahman
A.Waberi](http://www.abdourahmanwaberi.com/?page=bibliographie) from Djibouti,
Jimi Yuma from Congo, [Patrice
Nganang](http://fr.wikipedia.org/wiki/Patrice_Nganang) and [Leonora
Miano](http://www.leonoramiano.com/index.php) from Cameroon… they're all in my
blogroll.

![](http://1.bp.blogspot.com/_kl-8Cz-
TJDI/S_8I-e6qxPI/AAAAAAAACCc/wLqswkKjDCY/s400/P5220170.JPG)

"Saisons sauvages" by Kettly Mars (Haiti)

**\- African authors now regularly win French literary awards, but most of
your finds are totally unknown, invisible in French bookstores  
**

\- Black literature in French has trouble finding a publisher, but also a
readership. In francophone Africa, books are difficult to publish, expensive
and hard to find. But the problem is elsewhere. We West Africans can write and
publish our own perspectives, but we should read them, too. Somehow, Africans
have trouble reading books about themselves. They look elsewhere for
references. My blog offers authors some coverage: I get a thousand visitors
per month, 50% come from Metropolitan France, 30% from West Africa..

\- **You sometimes stray to review Japanese or South American books on your
blog, but never French “white” literature.**

![](http://3.bp.blogspot.com/_kl-8Cz-
TJDI/S4xdR2ApwdI/AAAAAAAAB7w/B3vdW3DjCrk/s400/P2260043.JPG)

"Le passé devant soi" by Gilbert Gatore

French literature is too navel-orientated. We're not on this earth for long.
Let's get going. And French white writers are still totally blind to the true
challenges in France, the plight of black or Arab youths disenfranchised in
poor suburbs.

![](http://2.bp.blogspot.com/_kl-8Cz-
TJDI/S6AEpGRrS2I/AAAAAAAAB9Q/UlkBvSeTyMc/s400/P2260046.JPG)

"Trois femmes puissantes", the award wining book and best-seller in France, by
French-Senegalese author Marie Ndiaye

**Why did you pick this name for your blog, “Chez Gangoueus”?**

Ngangoué is my second Congolese given name. I consider myself of African and
Western background and culture, I looked for a handle that would reflect this,
and added the _us s_ uffix, in reference to latin culture, names like Brutus,
Octavius or Britannicus. Gangouéus reflects my dual identity.

**You alway take a picture of the book you are reading and most of the time,
in public transports.  
**

Because that's where I read **!** Work is work, family is family. Time spent
commuting to and from work in Paris became my reading time!

![](http://3.bp.blogspot.com/_kl-8Cz-
TJDI/S_M1FQKspvI/AAAAAAAACB0/V8FaMwKwt3w/s400/P5040107.JPG)

"Les phalènes" by Tchicaya U Tam'Si

****__

