Bloggers across the Middle East mourned the death of Portuguese writer Jose
Saramago – the only Portuguese language Nobel Prize Winner in Literature, who
has his own religious and political controversial views. People [in the
Lusosphere](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2010/06/18/portugal-a-tribute-in-
unison-to-saramago/) and all over the world reacted to his death, and the Arab
world is no exception.

[![Jose Saramago](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2010/06/saramago-309x300.jpg)](http://dajeej.wordpress.com/2010/06/19/%D8%B3%D8%A7%D8%B1%D8%A7%D9%85%D8%A7%D8%BA%D9%88/)

Yazan Ashqar published this photo of Saramago in his blog and wrote one of his
most famous quotes under it: I think we are blind. Blind but seeing. Blind
people who can see, but do not see.
http://dajeej.wordpress.com/2010/06/19/%D8%B3%D8%A7%D8%B1%D8%A7%D9%85%D8%A7%D8%BA%D9%88/

Egyptian blogger, Badawiaa, wrote in her blog about[ Saramago bidding farewell
to life:](http://wednane3ish.katib.org/node/432)

في خطابه بمناسبة فوزه بنوبل، تحدث ساراماغو عن سنوات الطفولة واستذكر وفاة جده
جيرونيمو بهذه الكلمات: “ذهب إلى حديقة بيته. هناك بضع شجرات: أشجار تين وزيتون.
ذهب إليها واحدة واحدة واحتضن الأشجار ليقول لها وداعا، لأنه كان يعرف أنه لن
يعود. إن رأيت شيئا كهذا وإن عشته ولمْ يترك فيك ندبا إلى آخر العمر، فإنك رجل
بلا إحساس”.  
اليوم جاء الدور على ساراماغو ليقبّل أشجار حديقته هو الآخر ويقول لها: وداعا.

In his speech on the occasion of winning the Nobel prize, Saramago spoke about
his childhood and remembered his grandfather's death: “He went to the garden
of his house. There were some trees and bushes there, fig and olive trees. He
went to the trees one after the other, hugged and bid each one of them
goodbye. He knew that he won't be able to get back to them again. If such
scene doesn't leave a wound in your soul for the rest of your life, then you
are a senseless man.”  
And here comes the day where it's Saramago's turn to hug his own trees and
kiss them goodbye.

