The American poet [Walt Whitman](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Walt_Whitman)
said, “After you have exhausted what there is in business, politics,
conviviality, and so on – have found that none of these finally satisfy, or
permanently wear – what remains? Nature remains.” In this post we hear about
two women with a great love of nature: a nun who has found her home in the
convent garden, and a city-dwelling mother who has brought her dreams of a
village garden to the balcony of her apartment.

_Ruba Anabtawi_ has interviewed Sister Angela, a nun with a special love of
plants. She was born in Lebanon but is now with the [Rosary
Sisters](http://www.jpost.com/Opinion/Columnists/Article.aspx?id=178548) in
[Beit Hanina](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Beit_Hanina) to the north of
[Jerusalem](http://rubaanabtawi.maktoobblog.com/1596589/%D9%85%D8%A8%D8%A7%D8%AF%D8%B1%D8%A9-%D8%A8%D9%8A%D8%A6%D9%8A%D8%A9/):

أنجيلا نهرا، أو نجلة كما كان اسمها قبل الترهبن، قاومت رفض العائلة لفكرة ان
تصبح راهبة بأن أصرت على موقفها ورتبت أمر ترهبنها بدايةً في لبنان، حتى جاءتها
الموافقة ودعيت من قبل الفاتيكان لابتداء مسيرة الترهبن في القدس، وكان ذلك أوائل
التسعينيات. […] أنجيلا التي ترعرعت في قرية طرزا الخضراء والمحاطة بالحقول، لم
تطور آنذاك روابطاً واضحة مع النباتات، ولكن حين وجدت نفسها في دير الرئاسة، حيث
ستكرس معظم وقتها في هذا المكان، وعلى الرغم من صعوبات البداية والبعد عن الأهل،
إلا أنها وجدت في النباتات إحدى الغايات إضافة إلى تكريس وقتها لخدمة الدير عبر
الإشراف على الراهبات المسنات وإدارة جزء من شؤون البيت.  
“النباتات بهاء الأرض، والدين معنى الحياة”، هكذا تربط أنجيلا بين النباتات
والرهبنة.

Angela Nahran, or Najla as she was known before taking orders, resisted her
family's rejection of the idea of her becoming a nun. She insisted, and
arranged to take orders at first in Lebanon, until the approval came and she
was requested by the Vatican to begin her journey as a nun in Jerusalem. This
was in the early nineties. […] Angela grew up in the green village of
[Tourza](http://www.tourza.net/eng/history.php) surrounded by fields, but at
that time she did not develop a clear connection to plants. However, she found
herself in the convent, where she would devote most of her time, and despite
the difficulties at the beginning and the distance from her family, she found
plants to be one of her purposes, in addition to devoting her time to serving
the convent by looking after the elderly nuns and managing part of the
household's affairs.  
“Plants are the glory of the earth, and religion is the meaning of life”. Thus
Angela makes a link between plants and taking orders.

[![Sister Angela](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2010/07/sisterangela.jpg)](http://rubaanabtawi.maktoobblog.com/1596589/%D9%85%D8%A8%D8%A7%D8%AF%D8%B1%D8%A9-%D8%A8%D9%8A%D8%A6%D9%8A%D8%A9/)

Sister Angela

So how did this connection to plants develop?

حبُ أنجيلا للنباتات تشكّل بعد أربع سنوات من مجيئها إلى القدس، حين كانت ترافق
رئيستها في جولاتها في بستان الدير، فتعلمت منها أسس الرعاية بالنباتات، وشغف
العناية بها، ما حدا بانجيلا إلى الالتفات أكثر إلى الطبيعة من حولها، لتنشأ
بينهما علاقة خاصة وتعلق شديدين، فاق اهتمام الراهبات الأخريات، ما جعل صيت
أنجيلا يعلو بالدير، فتارة تُرى تزرع الشتلات، وتارة تُشاهد ترعى النباتات
المنزلية فتمسح الغبار عن أوراقها وتلمعها فتتألق في الأروقة، عدا عن سقايتها لها
وتشذيبها لأغصان الأشجار، مع تشجيعها الراهبات الاعتماد على ثمار الأشجار المحلية
وتوصياتها للبستاني بعدم استخدام المبيدات الكيماوية ومتابعة الأشجار في أوقات
غيابها، إضافة إلى دورها في إدخال شتلات أشجار جديدة. كل تلك، هي بصمات أشاعت
أصداء مقولة انتشرت في الدير وخارجه:” الأشجار بزمن أنجيلا تعمّر ولا تموت”.

Angela's love for plants was formed four years after coming to Jerusalem, when
she accompanied her Mother Superior on her tours around the convent's garden.
She learnt from her the fundamentals of looking after plants, and a passion
for caring for them. This prompted Angela to pay more attention to the nature
around her, to create a special relationship and a strong bond with it. The
interest of the other nuns was awakened, which made Angela's reputation grow
in the convent. Sometimes she can be seen planting seedlings, and sometimes
can be witnessed caring for house plants and wiping dust from their leaves and
making them shine. Apart from watering the plants and pruning the roots of the
trees, she encourages the sisters to rely on the fruit of native trees and
advises the gardener not to use chemical pesticides and to look after the
trees when she's away. That is in addition to the role she has played in
introducing new tree seedlings. These are all impressions that have pervaded
the talk that echoes in the convent and outside: “In Angela's time the trees
live long and don't die.”

In Akka, _Rasha Helwa_ writes about her mother's
[garden](http://zaghroda.blogspot.com/2010/06/blog-post_24.html):

والدتي شادية (أم اسكندر) لاجئة من قرية إقرث (قضاء صفد)، لكنها من مواليد قرية
الرامة الجليلية.  
تعمل ممرضة منذ أكثر من عشرين عامًا في قرية ساجور، المحادية لقرية الرامة.  
منذ أن تزوجا والدتي ووالدي عام 1982 واختارا أن تكون عكّا بيتًا لهما (مسقط رأس
والدي وحبّه الأول-بالإذن من أمي)، كانت أمي تحلم، ولا تزال، ببيت صغير في قرية
جبلية وحديقة تزرع في أرضها ما تشاء من النباتات، الخضروات، الفاكهة والأزهار.  
أمي، بالرغم من حُبها المكتسب لعكّا، لا زالت تحتفظ بذاك الشوق للجبل والقرية
ولحديقة تفرش عليها أحلام فلاحة صغيرة – ما لي ومال المُدن؟-، أحلام ستثمر كي
تؤنسها فيما بعد في غيابنا، نحن بناتها وأبنائها، عندما سنكبر ونترك المدينة
الصغيرة بحثًا عن ميناء آخر.

My mother Shadia (Um Iskander) is a
[refugee](http://www.unrwa.org/etemplate.php?id=86) from the village of
[Iqrith](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Iqrit) in the district of
[Safad](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Safed), but was born in the village of
[Rameh](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Rameh) in
[Galilee](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Galilee).  
She has worked as a nurse for more than twenty years in the village of
[Sajur](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sajur), bordering the village of Rameh.  
Since my mother and father married in 1982 and chose
[Akka](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Acre,_Israel) to be their home (the
birthplace of my father and his first love – with the permission of my
mother), my mother has dreamt, and still is dreaming, of a small house in a
mountain village with a garden in whose soil she grows the plants, vegetables,
fruits and flowers she wishes.  
My mother, despite the love she has developed for Akka, still maintains a
longing for the mountain and the village and the garden carpeted with the
dreams of a young peasant woman – what have cities got to do with her anyway?
– dreams that will bear fruit in order to keep her company during our absence,
we her sons and daughters, when we grow older and leave the small city looking
for another port.

[![Shadia's garden](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2010/07/rashahelwa-375x281.jpg)](http://zaghroda.blogspot.com/2010/06/blog-
post_24.html)

Shadia's garden

قبل عام تقريبًا، أحضر والدي لوالدتي ثلاثة أصص بلون الخشب وضعهم على الشباك
المركزي للبيت المُطّل بجانبه على البحر.  
لم تزرع والدتي في الأصص الأزهار الملونة؛ زرعت النعنع، الميرامية، الفلفل
الأحمر، الروزماري..  
والدتي، بعد سبعة وعشرين عامًا في عكّا، وجدت لها معادلة بسيطة نجحت من خلالها أن
تُحضر الرامة وإقرث إلى بيتها في الطابق الثالث من بناية قديمة في مدينة يحيطها
البحر، وأن تتوقف عن شراء النعنع من السوق.

About a year ago, my father brought my mother three wood-coloured flowerpots
and placed them on the [sill of the] main window of the apartment overlooking
the side next to the sea.  
My mother did not plant colourful flowers in the pots; she planted mint, sage,
red pepper, rosemary…  
My mother, after twenty-seven years in Akka, has found a simple equation by
means of which she has succeeded both in bringing Rameh and Iqrith to her home
on the third floor of an old building in the city surrounded by the sea, and
in stopping buying mint from the market.

