Through the Latin American social networks there is a new video spreading like
wildfire: it unites three of the most recognized viral video sensations in
one. Peruvian La Tigresa del Oriente and Wendy Sulca with Ecuadorian Delfin
Quishpe virtually united to sing “I'll dance in your lands”, a song about
Israel. None of them have visited Israel, but that didn't stop them from
singing about the beauty of Jerusalem and Tel Aviv.

[![Delfin, Tigresa and Wendy in a poppy field.
](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2010/04/Video.jpg)](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2010/04/Video.jpg)

[Delfin Quishpe ](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Delfin_Quishpe)is an indigenous
Kichwa Ecuadorian who became famous after his blue-screen hit [_“The Twin
Towers”_ was uploaded on Internet on
2006.](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2007/03/07/ecuador-chile-kitsch-goes-
for-cash-on-youtube/), in the video, he lamented the death of his girlfriend
in 9-11, but his bad acting and dance moves gathered all the attention. Next
in the lineup is [Tigresa del
Oriente.](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tigresa_del_Oriente) Her name is Judith
Bustos, a make-up artist and home-maker from the Amazon region of Peru who
decided to try her luck writing songs and singing them in 2006. Someone
uploaded her videos and skyrocketed her to internet stardom; leopard clothing,
press-on nails and jungle dancers included. Wendy Sulca is the youngest of the
three. At the tender age of 8 she apparently hit on the recipe for viral video
success with not one, but two videos: on one hand, her [single _“La
Tetita”_](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2008/01/18/peru-wendy-sulca-child-
video-sensation/) on the subject of breast feeding and on the other hand,
_“Cerveza, Cerveza”_ a song about how one beer is never enough.

The campy trio's video has already been picked up by media in foreign
countries. According to [Carlos
Reyes](http://www.shoutcastblog.com/bloggers/carlos-reyes/) of
_[ShoutCast](http://www.shoutcastblog.com/2010/04/21/tigresa-del-oriente-
wendy-sulca-delfin-en-tus/) _music blog,

> The three artists have transcended their 15 minutes of fame to become part
> of the Latino vernacular, at least on the Web. Many refer to them as
> characters, but the whole reason why they have exploded in popularity is
> because they're anything but; they're just too far away from pop music's
> standards.

That's not all. In [Argentina's newspaper
Panorama](http://www.diariopanorama.com/diario/noticias/2010/04/22/a-62384.html)
they quote Residente, who is the lead singer of [Grammy winning band Calle
13](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Calle_13_%28band%29), as stating:

> El mejor junte que he visto. Histórico. Es como si se juntaran Madonna, Lady
> GaGa y Michael Jackson

This is the best collaboration I've seen. Historic. It's as if Madonna, Lady
GaGa and Michael Jackson recorded something together.

Roy Palomino[ for collaborative online magazine LaMula.pe](http://lamula.pe)
interviewed Judith Bustos, [who says about
Israel](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=frlLo5q0lhE): It is, I believe, in the
other side of the world. She thanks @Calle13oficial and also rocker Juanes
from Colombia who congratulated her, @tigresaoriente, through his twitter
account @Juanestwiter. However, what she doesn't say about the video is more
revealing than what she does say. When asked about who is the mastermind
behind this, she says it is a secret but that we'll soon find out who is the
“important editor” who put together this viral video. Where they set up? And
if so, would it be a bad thing?

The three artists apparently didn't need to travel to make their
collaboration: each artist recorded in front of a blue screen and also in
different local sites including a pen with camels, a boat in a lake with
monkeys in the background and rustic houses. In some parts of the video their
images are cut and superimposed in front of different stock videos or each
other: from scuba diving scenes, windmills and lakes to images of what we
assume they believe are beaches, parties and sights of Israel. The lyrics
speak of how they would like to visit Israel to dance on their lands, and how
beautiful it is. On [Viral Video Chart
](http://viralvideochart.unrulymedia.com/youtube/en_tus_tierras_bailare_wendy_delfiacuten_y_la_tigresa_juntos_por_primera_vez?id=xzMUyqmaqcw)they
report the statistics as follows:

> 367,851 views  
>  Discovered 20 Apr 2010  
>  89 blog posts  
>  0 duplicate videos  
>  996 tweets  
>  2,564 comments  
>  30,828 Facebook shares

However, a quick search on YouTube shows us that there are now dozens of
duplicates soaring through the web.

On Twitter, the stickyness of the song was expressed by
[@jdclarke00](http://twitter.com/jdclarke00/status/12578993599) of Costa Rica:

#Iconfess that I only saw the video one time. But I woke up singing “Israel,
Israel, how pretty Israel is”

[@FranPisca](http://twitter.com/FranPisca/statuses/12977003028) also had an
earworm brought on by second-hand contagion:

1 friend at the office sang the “hit” by Wendy, Delfin and the Tigress of the
North “Israel, I'll dance in your lands”. I hate her, now it's stuck!

Chilean [@Natycronopia
](http://twitter.com/natycronopia/statuses/12975216473)wasn't too pleased
about her coworkers enthusiasm:

I'm tortured by @rfiguers with the song by Wendy, La Tigresa del oriente and
Delfin. I don't get paid to stand for this.

So with no further ado; here is the [video for _I'll Dance In Your
Lands_](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=xzMUyqmaqcw) the song [claimed by
some](http://www.diariopanorama.com/diario/noticias/2010/04/22/a-62384.html)
to be the “We are the World” of Latin America:

And finally, as if any more proof of its popularity was needed, already
several “tribute” videos and parodies have been uploaded. In the [Official
Tigresa del Oriente
blog](http://latigresadelorienteclub.blogspot.com/2010/04/videoclip-de-la-
tigresa-del-oriente-es.html) they selected a couple of them to share:

