[![](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-content/uploads/2010/07/Logo-RGB-
rectangular-wide-375x206.jpg)](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2010/07/Logo-RGB-rectangular-wide.jpg)

[Two years ago](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2008/07/06/global-lives-
project-recording-the-lives-of-10-people-for-1-day/) we wrote about a project
in its initial stages: Global Lives set out to record a day in the life of 10
people from all over the world. Today we revisit the project and check up on
how they're coming along.

Back in February the [Global Lives Project ](http://globallives.org/)had the
opening night in San Francisco for their video installation where the 24 hour
long videos for each of the 10 participants were projected simultaneously
while people could choose to walk from room to room or to view all the screens
at once. Following is the video of the opening night:

On their site you can view short segments from the days of each one of the
subjects as well as a biographical page. Take for example Dadah, a farm worker
and mother from Sarimukti Village in Indonesia: On [her bio
page](http://globallives.org/wiki/dadah-sarimukti-village-indonesia/) you can
learn about her life, her family, the [bios of the film
crew](http://globallives.org/wiki/indonesia-crew/), and then watch a short
video with subtitles in many different languages showing us an excerpt of her
daily life.

You can also learn about [Zhanna Dosmailova
](http://globallives.org/wiki/zhanna-vannovka-kazakhstan/)in Vannovka,
Kazakhstan. This 5 year old lives with her family in the orphanage they run.
In addition to the bio and short film, there is also a
[slideshow](http://www.flickr.com/photos/globalliveskazakhstan/sets/72157622549071454/show/)
with pictures taken during the family interview and during the day of filming.

There are 8 other biographies with videos on the site, reflecting the lives of
10 people from different places in the world, and varied walks of life:
joining Zhanna and Dadah are Israel Feliciano from Brazil, Dusan Lazic from
Serbia, James Bullock from the US, Muttu Kumar from India, Kai Liu from China,
Rumi Nagashima from Japan, Edith Kaphuka from Malawi and Jamila Jad from
Lebanon. You can [click on their faces](http://globallives.org/) on the Global
Lives map, or go through to video and [see their biographical shorts.
](http://globallives.org/videos/)

What has been the process of filming these lives? A video made by the
Brazilian Global Lives crew takes us through the process, explaining the
importance of all the details someone new to video may overlook such as
finding a local guide, sketching out the daily events, planning for lighting
during the nights or indoors and release forms for everyone appearing on the
videos.

You can follow the Global Lives project on twitter as
[@globallives](http://twitter.com/globallives), subscribe to their [YouTube
channel](http://www.youtube.com/user/GlobalLives) or join them on
[Facebook](http://www.facebook.com/globallives). However if you are lucky
enough to be in London on the 22nd of this month, you might consider[ seeing
the project in person](http://globallives.org/london2010/), as they will be
screening the videos and telling all about the Global Lives Project.

