In the indigenous village of [Santiago
Atitlan](http://www.santiagoatitlan.com/indexeng.html), Internet access has
been declared “a human right” by both inhabitants and local authorities.
Authorities are also implementing a plan to provide free community Wi-Fi to
the entire population so that everyone can benefit from it and exercise their
rights.

The concepts of community and sharing are entrenched in the daily life of
indigenous people in Guatemala. Common spaces, open doors, collaboration and
sharing are the main characteristics of these communities, especially among
small linguistic communities such as the Mayan
[Tzutuhil](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tz%27utujil_people) indigenous group
in the Highlands of Guatemala. As cultures evolve and adapt to new discoveries
in science and technology, indigenous cultures are embracing new technologies
and adapting their use to accord with traditional principles. Such is the case
with Internet access.

![](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2012/07/409590_158390487630162_1537877158_n-375x209.jpg)

Picture by Yo respondo used with permission.

The youth of Santiago Atitlan pro-actively use digital tools. Their programme
I respond! and you? ([Yo Respondo, y Tu?) ](http://www.yorespondoytu.tk/)[es]
is broadcast via the Internet and local cable TV and promoted throughout
social networks. There they host dialogues discussing local problems, such as
recycling and other ecological issues.

The group dedicated a show to the community Wi-Fi project once the first phase
was ready. During the episode, called “Internet… my human right”, Frank La
Rue, the [UN Special
Rapporteur](http://www.ohchr.org/EN/Issues/FreedomOpinion/Pages/OpinionIndex.aspx)
on the promotion and protection of the right to freedom of opinion and
expression, was invited to launch the community Wi-Fi. The Special Rapporteur
congratulated the community and celebrated that Internet access is recognized
as an effective tool to exercise and enforce other rights.

As described by Radio Ati, the community Wi-Fi project is a result of the
[joint efforts](http://www.radioati.com/2012/07/conectados-en-santiago-
atitlan.html) [es] of the population and local authorities:

> “Tomás Chiviliú, alcalde municipal, indica que uno de sus propósitos es
> transparentar la información municipal, por lo que se ha desarrollado una
> red que permite la circulación informativa entre las distintas dependencias
> ediles. Este proceso llevó a instalar el equipo necesario para ofrecer
> Internet a los vecinos. Agrega que “es importante garantizar el acceso a la
> información en general, beneficiando no solo a la juventud sino también a la
> empresa local y al turismo”.

“Tomás Chiviliú, mayor of the city, points out that one of his purposes is to
bring transparency to local public information, therefore they developed a
network allowing the free circulation of information between different local
government offices. That led them to install all the necessary equipment and
offer Internet to the entire neighbourhood. He added that it is important to
guarantee access to information in general, because it is of benefit to the
youth, local companies and tourism”.

![](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2012/08/599726_411789865523040_1771102126_n-300x300.jpeg)

Picture by Juan Damian used with permission.

While Santiago Atitlan is one of the poorest villages in Central America, it
is leading the way by providing communal Internet access. However, the network
is password protected: the password, “I am Atitlan” (Yo soy Atitlan), seeks to
strengthen local identity and remind its users that the people accessing the
network are located next to one of the most beautiful lakes in the world,
[Atitlan Lake](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lago_de_Atitlán). The Municipality
of Santiago Atitlan is also [very active on Facebook](http://es-
es.facebook.com/munisantiagoatitlan) [es] and Twitter with the account
[@atitlanmuni](http://twitter.com/atitlanmuni) [es].

[![](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2012/08/396957_411791525522874_282354501_n-300x300.jpeg)](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
admin/Picture by Juan Damian used with permission.)

Picture by Juan Damian used with permission.

Santiago Atitlan and its people are teaching the rest of us three important
lessons: Internet is a rights enabler, since it makes the exercise of other
rights possible, such as, the right to know; community Wi-Fi, as described by
the mayor, has many benefits; and finally, new technologies are of extreme
importance for indigenous cultures, as they enable indigenous youth to share
their millenarian cultures with the world, spread their ideas, and invent a
future without borders. The future is now, and you can live it in the village
of Santiago Atitlan.

