Good times for [those](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/50_Cent_Party) still
trying to explain the irrelevance within Chinese society of all the people
[detained, arrested or disappeared](http://chrdnet.org/2011/03/31/escalating-
crackdown-following-call-for-%E2%80%9Cjasmine-revolution%E2%80%9D-in-china/)
since late February. Chinese Internet services continue to block essentially
any mention of these names, and [Ai
Weiwei](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ai_Weiwei)‘s situation remains
[unreported](http://cmp.hku.hk/2011/04/07/11326/) by Mainland Chinese media.

Even [Hung Huang](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hung_Huang), writing simply of
Ai Weiwei, “Still no news.”, appears to have had that update censored from
[her](http://t.sina.com.cn/n/%E6%B4%AA%E6%99%83ilook)
[Weibo](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Weibo) account this week. A search on
Weibo [for Ai's
name](http://t.sina.com.cn/k/%25E8%2589%25BE%25E6%259C%25AA%25E6%259C%25AA&Refer=STopic_box)
brings back only the message that:

> 根据相关法律法规和政策，搜索结果未予显示。

In accordance with the relevant laws, regulations and policies, the search
results have not been displayed.

[![](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2011/04/Picture69-375x240.png)](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2011/04/Picture69.png)

For more about what little is being said in public about Ai Weiwei's arrest,
see GVO writer Andy Yee's post
[here](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2011/04/04/china-ai-weiwei-detained-
initial-twitter-reactions/). Off Twitter, amid the relative silence among
politically active ‘netizens’ as their peers and opinion leaders have
disappeared, one of the few public statements in recent days came earlier this
week from [Guangzhou](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Guangzhou)-based academic,
writer, feminist and filmmaker [Ai
Xiaoming](http://www.google.com/search?hl=en&source=hp&biw=1273&bih=703&q=%22Ai+Xiaoming%22&aq=f&aqi=g2g-v2&aql=&oq=),
with her post on Canyu.org, [‘Today, everybody can become Ai
Weiwei’](http://www.canyu.org/n23610c6.aspx):

>
> 艾未未昨天在北京机场被带走，此后失去消息，其工作室和家人住处都被查抄，抄走三十多台电脑等。到今天晚上9点，世界各大主要媒体都报道了这个消息，不奇怪，中国的主流媒体当然没有报道。
>
>
> 很多推友在推特上呼吁释放艾未未，签名正在进行时http://twitition.com/ao9m7，艾未未的研究网站也在运行中http://aiwwstudy.appspot.com/，昨天到今天36个小时过去了，依然没有看到新的消息。

Ai Weiwei was taken away yesterday at the Beijing Airport, and nothing has
been heard since. His workspace and home have both been ransacked, and 30
computers were among the things seized. As of 9 pm today, media from all
around the world have reported this news, but, predictably, Chinese mainstream
media of course haven't written about it.

