In the series of posts highlighting the current state of citizen media in
Egypt, we have talked about taboos like [sexuality in the
blogsphere](https://rising.globalvoicesonline.org/blog/2010/07/01/egypt-
talking-openly-about-sexuality/), in addition to the [cultural side of
it](https://rising.globalvoicesonline.org/blog/2010/07/09/egypt-the-cultural-
side-of-a-blogosphere/). However, a question is still relevant – whether or
not all the voices on the blogsphere are representative to the various voices
in Egypt, or is it only inclusive to the capital city?

[![Cairo streets by Ed Yourdon.
](https://rising.globalvoicesonline.org/files/2010/08/cairo-
street-300x199.PNG)](http://www.flickr.com/photos/yourdon/3118055157/)

Cairo street scenes. Image by Flickr user Ed Yourdon. CC BY-SA

**Cairo – The capital city**

The population of Egypt, according to a [survey conducted in July
2007](http://www.mapsofworld.com/egypt/population.html), is estimated to be
around 80 million, where the estimated rate of growth of population is 1.721%.
Cairo is regarded as the 19th largest city in the world, with a total
population exceeding 16 million people, and among the world's most densely
populated cities.

Although the government is trying to encourage migration to the newly
irrigated land reclaimed from the desert, the proportion of the population
living in rural areas has continued to decrease as people moved to the cities
in search of employment and higher standard of living. Most of the facilities
and governmental institutes are centralized in Cairo.

[![Map of Egypt from
elicrisko](https://rising.globalvoicesonline.org/files/2010/08/240459915_8d0861be65-250x300.jpg)](http://www.flickr.com/photos/elicrisko/240459915/)

Map of Egypt. Image by Flickr user elicrisko. CC BY

**But Egypt is not Cairo**

The concentration of population is in major urban areas in Egypt and Egypt is
not only Cairo. People live in three major regions of the country: Cairo and
Alexandria and elsewhere along the banks of the Nile – as well as small
communities spread throughout the desert regions of Egypt. Below is a list for
some of the most important cities in Egypt, and famous citizen voices within
these areas.

[**Alexandria**](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Alexandria), with a population
of 4.1 million, is the second-largest city in Egypt, and is the country's
largest seaport. It is also an important tourist resort and an important
industrial center because of its natural gas and oil pipelines from Suez,
another city in Egypt.

Recently Alexandria witnessed a [terrible
crime](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2010/06/10/egypt-khaled-said-an-
emergency-murder-by-an-emergency-law/) where _Khaled Said_ , a 28-year-old
Egyptian citizen from there, was allegedly tortured to death at the hands of
two officers who wanted to search him under the emergency law. [My name is
Khaled Said](http://www.facebook.com/khaledkilled?ref=search) [Ar] is a
Facebook page that was created after his murder – and in no time became an
important network for arranging silent sit-ins condemning the emergency law,
and police brutality in Egypt.

[**El-Mahalla El-Kubra**](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/El-Mahalla_El-Kubra) is
a large industrial and agricultural city in Egypt, located in the middle of
the Nile Delta on the western bank of the Damietta branch. It is known for its
dominant textile industry.

It is home to the largest public sector Egyptian textile company, the Misr
Spinning and Weaving Company , and during the calls for the [first national
disobedience in 2006](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2008/04/07/egypt-a-wake-
up-strike/); blogger _[Kareem El Behery](http://egyworkers.blogspot.com/)_
[Ar] did a great job covering workers protests. Since then, he’s been popular
with covering labor issues in Egypt in general, and El Mahalla El Kubra in
particular.

[**Al-Arīsh**](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Arish) is the capital and largest
city (with 114,900 inhabitants) of the Egyptian governorate of North Sinai,
lying on the Mediterranean coast of the Sinai peninsula which historically has
been the center of conflict between various political factions. Al Arish is
mostly inhabitant by [Bedouins](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bedouin), a
predominantly desert-dwelling Arab ethnic group.

From Al Arish there is a blog entitled “[Sinai where I
am](http://alanany.wordpress.com/)” [Ar], by _Al Anany_ , that turned as a
portal to the daily news and events happening in the city.

And also, not to forget the famous blogger, activist and poet _Mosad Abu Fagr_
, who’s just been [released after
detention](https://advocacy.globalvoicesonline.org/2010/07/14/egypt-blogger-
released-after-more-than-two-years-in-detention/) for three years because of
his writings about the demands of Sinai Bedouins, expressing their life and
seeking equal rights of citizenship.

[![Port Said. Image by Flickr user dolanh. CC BY-NC-
SA](https://rising.globalvoicesonline.org/files/2010/08/port-
said.jpg)](http://www.flickr.com/photos/reneeanddolan/54237833/)

Port Said. Image by Flickr user dolanh. CC BY-NC-SA

[**Port Said**](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Port_Said) is another major
Egyptian city in north-east Egypt, near the Suez Canal, with an approximate
population of 515,007.

One of the earliest websites that was opened, [PortSaid
online](http://www.portsaid-online.com/) [Ar] has been launched to act as an
important portal to follow news happening there, as well as a way for
PortSaidians to follow job listings and events taking place in their city.

Lastly, [**Minya
Governorate**](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Minya_Governorate) is one of the
governorates of Upper Egypt. It is located approximately 245 km (152 miles)
south of Cairo on the western bank of the Nile River, which flows north
through the city – with population around 4.2 million.

Minya is dubbed by the locals “Bride of Upper Egypt”, in reference to its
strategic location in Middle Egypt as a vital link between the north and the
south of Egypt.

In Minya, our 3rd winning project “[Women of Minya day by
day](https://rising.globalvoicesonline.org/projects/women-of-minya-day-by-
day/)” should take place. It is expected to amplify voices of working women in
informal laborers, and shed light on the many difficulties and obstacles they
face.

**Representative or not?**

Well, since there are no detailed study about the demography of the blogs in
Egypt is available, it is still difficult to tell whether the blogs are
representative to all ethnics and geo-locations within the country or not.
However, no doubt the high concentration of population within Cairo, as well
as the low Internet access rates in other cities – stay as an obstacle towards
spreading the usage of citizen media evenly through out the whole country. Yet
hopefully, with initiatives similar to [Women of Mineya Day by
Day](https://rising.globalvoicesonline.org/projects/women-of-minya-day-by-
day/) seeing the light, the future of citizen media in Egypt would take a
different route.

