Youth from around the globe were awarded in New York for their thought-
provoking short films showing their proposals for making society more peaceful
and multicultural by addressing the topics of diversity, migration and social
inclusion.

[![Multicolor handprints on white cloth. Image by Flickr user John-Morgan \(CC
BY 2.0\).](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2011/11/2344975342_07be79b4d4-375x249.jpg)](http://www.flickr.com/photos/aidanmorgan/2344975342/in/photostream/)

Multicolor handprints on white cloth. Image by Flickr user John-Morgan (CC BY
2.0).

The [Plural + Youth Video Festival ](http://www.unaoc.org/pluralplus/)set out
to recognize youth as powerful agents of social change; in the [Awards
Ceremony](http://www.flickr.com/photos/unaoc/sets/72157628135495662/) they
commended young filmmakers for their winning efforts.

Let's see some of the winning videos: [GIFT ](http://youtu.be/atJlH3b_AdY)was
created by Pang Jia Wei, Ryan Tan Chuan Min and the Tunku Abdul Rahman College
in Malaysia and the video won in the 18-25 year old category. In it, we can
see and hear how it takes diversity to build a nation.

[The New Portuguese](http://youtu.be/n5suLEAeWE8) is a short documentary on
immigrants in Portugal: whether they are immigrating to the capital city of
Lisbon from their hometowns or whether their parents moved to Portugal where
they were born, they all struggle for acceptance and a place in the city and
country they call home.

[Wish](http://youtu.be/oO96GkdJbw4) is a short film about families in China.
It tells the story of a boy living with his grandfather while his parents work
in a far away city, and how doing what is economically best for a child may
turn out to be more challenging than planned.

[I am Quiaqueña](http://youtu.be/OSxB-u50OD8) is the musing of a young woman
born in the border between Argentina and Bolivia, and how belonging somewhere
is not as easy when geography and politics get in the way.

Having many similarities may not be enough when there is a difference that is
considered greater… that is the case of [Between Us
Two](http://youtu.be/GDdkDCI6f88), from Israel.

[Our Hood](http://youtu.be/vRE0wdyYqK8) has the Wafalme Crew, a musical group
composed of street kids who live in the ghettos of Nairobi, Kenya sing and
tell the story of how music changed their lives for the better, teaching them
about how to rise up to challenges and keep a positive outlook in life.

A young man writes to his father who has spent his whole life working far away
from his home in [Exile Song](http://youtu.be/Cz8mxDTW6jw), reminding him that
when he wishes to hear the thrushes and see the palm trees… all he has to do
is come back home.

In [Belong](http://youtu.be/gnRouxnBJeY), different immigrants in Finland
discuss their experience in living away from their homelands, and what are the
things that make them feel that they belong in their new home.

You can see the other winning videos on the [Plural + Youth Video Award
Page.](http://www.unaoc.org/pluralplus/winning-videos/plural-2011/)

