_Note: This post continues the series of the overview the current state of
citizen media in Egypt, as well as the societal context in which the three RV
grantees will implement their projects._

In 2006, Google Trends released some interesting statistics concerning
internet searches that include the term ‘sex,’ [revealing that the city of
Cairo topped the list of cities for these types of queries on the Google
search engine](http://sabbah.biz/mt/archives/2006/05/12/who-is-searching-for-
sex/) and overall, Egypt was the 2nd country. Despite this finding that many
Egyptian internet users look for anything related to sex, it is noted that
they are not always interesting about learning about sexuality.

There is a general sense in Egyptian society that sexuality is an
inappropriate subject for many Muslims and Copts, and issues like
homosexuality or sex workers go against their religion. In addition, even
reading about these things may end up getting the internet user involved with
what they perceive as an unacceptable sexual activity.

For others, sex and sexuality are considered to be private matters that should
not be discussed in public. However in an ironic sense, there are signs that
many Egyptians are involved with inappropriate sexual behaviors, when [83% of
Egyptian women](http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/7514567.stm) have reported being
sexually harassed. Many of the Egyptian slang words take on a sexual meaning
so that you have have to watch your words carefully in order to not be
misunderstood.

**Sex on the Cinema Screen**

In Egyptian dramatic cinema, sex is a common subject. In the 1990s, a very
successful movie called Cultural Movie was released. In this case, the word
“cultural” is used in Egyptian slang to refer to sex. The plot of the movie is
about three young men who want to watch a pornographic movie, but they neither
have the video nor the place to watch it. The movie's director, Muhammad Amin,
was one of the first to tackle this subject openly in film.

In 2002, a movie called The Ostrich and the Peacock was finally released,
[after being censored for more than three
decades](http://www.smh.com.au/articles/2002/04/03/1017206222206.html). The
movie portrays sexual compatibility, frigidity, female circumcision,
masturbation, and prostitution in Egyptian society. The original script was
developed by prominent filmmaker Salah Abou Seif, who died before getting the
approval to start shooting the movie. His son, Mohammed Abou Seif, was able to
complete the film, which received with praise from critics.

Amin made another film about the War in Iraq called [The Night Baghdad
Fell](http://movies.nytimes.com/movie/341311/The-Night-Baghdad-Fell/overview),
which shows how husbands have problems in their sex life because of the stress
and frustration over the invasion of Iraq and the fear that Egypt is next to
be invaded. Finally, another famous name in addressing sexuality in cinema is
the director [Inas ElDeghedy](http://inaseldeghedy.com/Home.htm), who tends to
get closer to these issues, but has received wide criticism in return. Some
see the message she tries to deliver as confrontational in regards to society.

**The Topic of Homosexuality**

In general, Egyptians are still uncomfortable with watching homosexuals in
films. In 2006, the movie [The Yacoubian
Building](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Yacoubian_Building_%28film%29) was
screened to tens of thousands of Egyptian, and it is based on the best seller
novel of the same name. However, the character named Hatem Rashid was
controversial because he was openly gay and had an affair with a soldier. A
number of Egyptian parliament members protested that this character was not
censored; they believed the movie defamed Egypt by portraying homosexuality,
terrorism, and corruption. An example of how many in the audience received the
character was demonstrated when Rashid was robbed by a male prostitute after
his breakup with the soldier, which was met with applause for his punishment.
Meanwhile, the actor who played Rashid was convincing in his role, which led
many to start rumors that he is a homosexual himself.

Calls for movie censorship for having homosexual characters did not prevent
Director [Khaled Youssef](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Khaled_Youssef) from
having a lesbian as a central figure in his famous movie Heena Maysara (When
it Gets Better). A scene from the movie showed a love scene between two women,
and once again calls for censorship were raised, along with voices from
Facebook users to boycott Youssef's movies.

**Mainstream Media**

While Youssef was regarded as a filmmaker who should be boycotted because of
his defamation of Egypt by tackling harsh topics, Hala Sarhan was less
fortunate. Sarhan is a famous TV presenter, who used to have a talk show on a
prominent satellite channel. On one of the episodes in 2007, [she hosted some
girls who claimed to be prostitutes. Sarhan was dismissed from her job after
rumors that her guests were not really sex
workers](http://www.aqoul.com/archives/2007/03/hala_sarhan_and.php). For the
station's management, it was not acceptable either to host a prostitute or to
lie about it to the audience.

Egyptians see television as a media platform that targets all family members,
thus sexuality should not appear on it. Since the late 1990s, Islamic shows
became popular, in which a sheikh is the host and people call in asking him
for Fatwas. What could be noticed is that many of the questions were related
to sexuality. The year 2007 could be considered as a turning point as a show
exclusively on sexuality was aired with the presenter is [Dr. Heba
Kotb,](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Heba_Kotb) who was a female hijabi sex
therapist. Her show became popular in a short time, and instead of receiving
criticism she was flattered with praise. Nowadays, people are not as sensitive
to sexuality issues on TV as before; but it depends on how it is presented.

[![Cairo streets by thephotostrand and used under a Creative Commons
license.](https://rising.globalvoicesonline.org/files/2010/07/cairostreet.jpg)](http://www.flickr.com/photos/seejanesphotos/3125776054/)

Cairo streets by thephotostrand and used under a Creative Commons license.

**Sexuality in Citizen Media**

Citizen media in Egypt started as an alternative to the mainstream media is
some cases, so naturally it became a platform to discuss taboos like
sexuality. Because the internet is generally a free and uncensored open space,
where anyone can write anonymously, there have been blogs that write about
sex, gender issues, and homosexuality. In addition, the topic of genital
mutilation was one of the most discussed topics, [as 81% of the thousands of
married, divorces, or widowed women interviewed said that they had undergone
the procedure](http://www.nocirc.org/symposia/first/badawi.html).

One of the most prominent achievements in the Egyptian blogosphere regarding
sexuality was the cause of sexual harassment. In 2006, a number of bloggers
published videos of mass harassment taking place in the street, [which led to
greater media attention](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2006/11/23/egypt-
cairos-women-speak-out-against-violence/). Later in 2009, Facebook was the
platform for a campaign for having a national [Egyptian Day Against Sexual
Harassment [ar]](http://www.facebook.com/group.php?gid=86447686494). The
participatory nature of citizen media also opens up these blog posts up to
anonymous comments that are often quite hateful and blame on the victim.

In 2006, a blog appeared titled [Ywmeyat Emraa Methleyya
[ar]](http://emraamethlya.blogspot.com/) (Homosexual Woman Diaries), which was
controversial enough to attract visitors who may have never heard about the
life of a female homosexual. She writes:

> This love is not against religion
>
> She is attractive from first sight, but once she talks you see her
> vulgarity! It is OK if this is her talking style or if all her words are
> slang, actually there are some women with whom you should not talk, even if
> you are in a relationship!
>
> She told me that she does not feel secure, she was in love only once, and
> her girlfriend was very pushy, she used to say to her ‘our relationship is
> against religion” and “I should get married”. She is for sure stupid! What
> is really against religion is that she would get married even if she is a
> homosexual.

Even health topics relating to sexuality is not very common. One of the only
blogging experiences about HIV/AIDS took place in 2008, [when some bloggers
launched a campaign to remove the stigma from people living with
HIV/AIDS](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2009/04/28/egypt-stigmatized-by-
aids/) after attending a workshop on the issue.

