_**This post is part of our special coverage on[Languages and the
Internet](https://globalvoicesonline.org/specialcoverage/languages-and-the-
internet/).**  
_  
One of the newest Global Voices Lingua sites is also its first in an
indigenous language, [Aymara](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Aymara_language).
This native language is spoken by more than 2 million people across the Andes,
especially in Bolivia and Peru, where it is among the official languages.
There are also people who speak Aymara in parts of Chile and Argentina, as
well as in the Aymara diaspora.

The first translation of [Global Voices in
Aymara](https://aym.globalvoicesonline.org/) was published in September 2009
and continued with intermittent publication for the next year. Once [Victoria
Tinta](https://ay.globalvoicesonline.org/author/victoria-tinta) took the helm
as editor, the site began to produce regular translations from Global Voices
in Spanish to Aymara. In addition to proofreading and formatting translations,
Victoria has been responsible for recruiting and coordinating the team of
volunteer translators. In all, there are have been 21 volunteers who have
contributed with a translation, and there is a core group of approximately one
dozen who have produced regular translations.

[![Global Voices in Aymara Editor Victoria Tinta at the Brazilian Digital
Culture Forum in São Paulo in October
2010.](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2011/07/VictoriaTinta.jpg)](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2011/07/VictoriaTinta.jpg)

Global Voices in Aymara Editor Victoria Tinta at the Brazilian Digital Culture
Forum in São Paulo in October 2010.

The new site is an initiative of the [Jaqi Aru](http://en.jaqi-aru.org/)
project based in El Alto, Bolivia and aims to contribute to the availability
of content in the Aymara language on the internet, as a way to promote and
preserve their native tongue. Most of the translators and members of the Jaqi
Aru project are students in the Linguistics Department of the [Public
University of El Alto](http://www.upea.edu.bo/) [es] (UPEA for its initials in
Spanish), and hold a passion for conserving the language for future
generations. The partnership with Global Voices enables the group to provide
valuable content in the Aymara language about current events and cultural
issues from around the world.

While all of the translators are bilingual in Aymara and Spanish, and in some
cases, multilingual, this translation project is still in its early stages. In
many cases, words do not exists in Aymara for the text that appears in Global
Voices articles. To help in such cases, there are projects such as
[Runasimipi](http://www.runasimipi.org/) that attempt to build consensus for
the translation of a particular word, especially words related to technology.
But in many cases, these translations are an individual's proposal for how
something should be translated. This interpretation may vary from translator
to translator, but beginning in this manner leaves room for discussion, thus
helping each translator improve upon their work.

[![Members of the Global Voices in Aymara translation
team.](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2011/07/GlobalVoicesAymara.jpg)](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2011/07/GlobalVoicesAymara.jpg)

Members of the Global Voices in Aymara translation team.

It may be true that most readers of Global Voices in Aymara have no trouble
reading Global Voices in Spanish instead, but the project is part of a larger
goal of encouraging Aymara speakers, especially young people, to embrace the
language of their ancestors. Making interesting content available on the
Internet, is only the first step for the Jaqi Aru project and the Global
Voices in Aymara translation team in hopefully setting an example for other
indigenous and minority language communities around the world.

_**This post is part of our special coverage on[Languages and the
Internet](https://globalvoicesonline.org/specialcoverage/languages-and-the-
internet/).**  
_

