[![](https://globalvoices.org/wp-
content/uploads/2019/08/myanmar-88-800x533.jpg)](https://www.facebook.com/theirrawaddy/posts/2733876019990571)

A commemoration of the 31st anniversary of the ’88 pro-democracy popular
uprising in downtown Yangon was organized on 8 August 2019 and joined by
former student leaders who were involved in the movement, Yangon regional
government officials and members of the public to honor those who lost their
lives during the crackdown on the protests. Photo and caption by Aung Kyaw
Htet / The Irrawaddy

_This[article](https://www.irrawaddy.com/specials/on-this-day/day-myanmar-
fought-democracy.html) by Wei Yan Aung is from The Irrawaddy, an independent
news website in Myanmar, and is republished on Global Voices as part of a
content-sharing agreement. This provides a brief historical overview of
Myanmar's transition from junta rule and the continuing struggle for
democracy. _

On 8 August 1988, citizens in Myanmar took to the streets to topple dictator
Ne Win’s oppressive socialist regime which had ruled the country with an iron
fist since 1962.

Despite the collapse of the regime, the movement—known as “the ’88
uprising”—led to a bloody coup by the military.

General Ne Win's regime demonetized the 25, 35, and 75 kyat notes without
warning or compensation in 1987 and perpetrated a brutal clampdown on pro-
democracy student movements in March and June of 1988 — events which were the
final straw for the people of Myanmar.

President U Sein Lwin, a Ne Win henchman who had played a continuous part in
suppressing peaceful demonstrations since the military regime staged a coup in
1962, declared a curfew and ordered a violent crackdown on protesters.
Government newspapers said over 300 died but independent sources estimated
that the actual figure was ten times that.

The military, at the instruction of Ne Win, seized power again through a coup
before holding general elections in 1990, but the military did not transfer
power to the election winner, the National League for Democracy (NLD). Myanmar
again fell under military rule for the next 20 years, during which it designed
a constitution in its own favor.

General elections were held again in 2010, but the military retained its full
grip through its proxy Union Solidarity and Development Party. The NLD, which
was born out of the ‘88 pro-democracy uprising,
[won](https://globalvoices.org/2016/02/02/for-myanmars-people-aung-san-suu-
kyis-government-marks-a-new-dawn/) the general elections in 2015 and became
the ruling party. However, the NLD still finds it difficult to remove the
military from politics.

