![](https://globalvoices.org/wp-
content/uploads/2019/10/0tTYwPdhleijWCbTyyTCy6qd6ESnCnRoPjyAUqM8huizVpmNDtphbjofqkz6HFKGHvRd-
jsJePQAxone4X4L1BIEhTJOMEU9heITWYSwKqXMV1t5VZFaEP5DwitFrMlMsrgelzxW-
saaf_pDTA.jpg)

Frank Arabi (left) explaining step by step on how to procure pharmaceutical
products on PharmLinks. Photo credit: Goodhope Amani, used with permission.

The problem of fake drugs is a nightmare that affects everyone around the
world — including Tanzania. While the government has introduced
[regulations](https://trade.business.go.tz/media/THE%20TANZANIA%20FOOD,%20DRUGS%20AND%20COSMETICS\(%20medical%20device\)%20regulation.pdf)
on medical businesses, there are still loopholes that allow people to sell
fake drugs both online and in brick-and-mortar shops due to a lack of
verification before drugs enter the market.

Now, an online platform called [PharmLinks](http://www.pharmlinks.com/),
founded in Tanzania, wants to stop the crisis of fake drugs. The platform
links pharmaceutical suppliers and wholesalers with retailers in Tanzania, to
buy quality products from registered pharmacies and also monitor the market.

[Frank Arabi](https://twitter.com/ArabiFrank), a medical student at Muhimbili
University of Health and Allied Sciences, co-founded
[PharmLinks](http://www.pharmlinks.com/) after he observed a number of
challenges faced by the pharmaceutical industry in Tanzania, including the
problem of procurement, which creates the perfect conditions for the fake drug
business.

![](https://globalvoices.org/wp-
content/uploads/2019/10/i1_U6-KPJsMJsF9e4yJUWYDDTWR-
cDQegxFXTqKIEWgnd2MpbEtjLJC-
nQ3sOKi-6Hifn0T9w4VIQv_Yqpjh58M7mByxasHB4TAoe6ai05kFY238AHZg314yBkMtzX1XNaIq21ZU6mYq66FK7A.jpg)

Frank Arabi, medical student and co-founder of Pharmlinks. Photo credit:
Goodhope Amani, used with permission.

Arabi and his team designed an online system to simplify pharmaceutical
procurement and fight fake drugs by closely monitoring companies along the
supply chain.

“The website provides a list of various pharmacies, products and prices. It
provides business analytics and inventory management also provides a chance
for end-users to verify the drugs. So it’s a complex system with a range of
solutions,” said Arabi in an interview with Global Voices.

Launched in 2018 and still in the pilot phase, 35 pharmacists can now freely
log onto the website and search medical products they want in their shops. The
system directs them to wholesalers suppliers and stores vetted for safety and
lists their prices for each product. The buyer can then choose the products
and pay for them online, and soon after, products are delivered.

### Encountering fake drugs

Venance Majula, a Dar dweller, remembers the day her sister nearly used fake
medicine after buying it at a pharmacy in Dar es Salaam, Tanzania. Luckily, a
family member who had prior knowledge about medicine realized the drug was
fake when he checked the serial numbers and ingredients.

“Most of us, we don’t know what is really original and what is not, I think
those who are responsible, maybe pharmacists, should provide education on what
to consider when buying or using particular medicine,” said Majula.

The World Health Organization says around [100,000 deaths in
Africa](https://www.un.org/africarenewal/magazine/may-2013/counterfeit-drugs-
raise-africa%E2%80%99s-temperature) yearly are linked to fake and substandard
drugs and the number is increasing.

Arabi believes that the problem of fake drugs is a big business and needs
various approaches to fight it. “The global counterfeit drug market is worth
[around $200 billion](https://www.reuters.com/article/us-britain-eu-fake-
drugs/drugmakers-say-uk-could-lose-out-on-eu-counterfeit-drugs-push-
idUSKCN1PX003) annually,” according to WHO, as reported by Reuters.

“I think this problem of counterfeit medicines is very complex and wide, and
it requires a multi-dimensional approach and tackling from every angle of the
supply chain is just one of them … we believe in the power of digital health
toward improving the health of our people,” said Arabi.

In June 2019, the government through Tanzania Medicines and Medical Devices
Authority ([TMDA)](https://www.tmda.go.tz/) issued a warning about the
presence of fake medicine in Tanzania that resembled Gentrisone, a medicinal
cream used for bacterial infections. [Local
media](https://dailynews.co.tz/news/2019-07-185d3032ecde003.aspx) outlet the
Daily News revealed that 4,118 tubes were found in six different regions of
Tanzania.

Pharmlinks has so far linked with tens of pharmacies in Dar es salaam,
Tanzania’s business hub, and hopes to connect to hundreds more in the coming
year.

The Tanzanian pharmaceutical market faces several challenges, including a
black market which allows people to buy medicines on the streets without a
required prescription from the physician.

On Tandale Street, 3 kilometers from Dar’s city center, Hawa Alex Dagaa, who
owns a pharmacy, admits that some people buy pharmaceutical products from
people who have no license to sell drugs, just because they sell the products
at a lower price.

“Some people are buying pharmaceutical products from people who are trading it
around because it's cheap, but sometimes it’s difficult to guarantee its
authenticity.”

![](https://globalvoices.org/wp-content/uploads/2019/10/K9nkOPCSNyUax5Xzf_-
vI6iS-3Ttd5MS2V2g7_qHweFtMWPNioRS2fCGc9dWo7ArUSehSvn53F1fXdBAyzkCaBurcCvZwufDBnYbQNcwuETlimqIeuBZvGQoWdipkGvtMjq1nJtgiPEulhICtQ.jpg)

Hawa Alex Dagaa at her pharmacy in Tandale, Dar es salaam, happy after she was
introduced to an online system that helps to procure quality drugs. Photo
credit: Goodhope Amani, used with permission.

Dagaa believes that the new online system will not only save time otherwise
used to find shops that sell medicine at affordable prices, but it will also
help track the pharmaceutical products distributed in the market, reducing the
chances of purchasing fake drugs.

“Because of traffic jams, it takes a long time to go to find … medical
products for my pharmacy in town, but with this system, you can log in, you
place your order, you pay and they deliver it,” she added.

Pharmlinks is not the only digital platform that focuses on fighting fake
drugs in Africa. In 2018, a Nigeria-based platform,
[medsaf](https://medsaf.com/), was launched to prevent fake drugs from
circulating in the West African country, while in Ghana,
[FarmaTrus](https://www.farmatrust.com/) was also introduced.

Pharmlinks works closely with the Tanzania Pharmacy Council, which is
responsible for registering pharmacies and pharmacists, along with TMDA, to
ensure this system is viable.

