![](https://globalvoices.org/wp-content/uploads/2017/10/Reclaim-the-
City-2-800x450.jpg)

Laundry Day – Shaneekah Abdullah washes he children's clothes in one of the
washrooms in Cissie Gool House. PHOTO: Nyasha Kadandara. Used with permission.

I have always said there are two types of people who travel to Cape Town.
There are the ones who are enthralled by the mountains, beaches, and endless
kilometers of wineries. And then there are those who cannot get over the harsh
contrast between the shacks and the mansions, or the scarcity of black and
brown people as they go about their tourist activities, except on the township
tours.

Honestly though, one does not have to look too hard to recognise that Cape
Town is an African utopia only for a few. For many of the city’s residents,
the legacy of segregation and spatial apartheid persists in a tangible and
powerful way.

After three years away, I recently traveled to Cape Town on business, and
decided to extend my trip in order to re-acquaint myself with the place that
had been my home for seven years. Naturally, a university reunion was in
order. I sat with my friends around a dinner table in Woodstock Coop, the
latest addition to the string of new trendy businesses taking over the old,
abandoned streets of lower Woodstock, and listened to their stories of how
they—university graduates and qualified professionals—couldn’t afford to live
in Cape Town. Some of them had already had a taste of life in Johannesburg,
South Africa’s notorious economic capital. Some had even bought property in
Sandton, reputed to be t[he richest square mile in
Africa](http://www.africapropertynews.com/southern-africa/3294-an-edgy-
history-of-africa-richest-square-mile-has-become.html). Yet even _they_
couldn’t afford to live in Cape Town?

My friends weren’t exaggerating. The average Capetonian needs to earn [three
times the average salary](http://nu.org.za/publications/) to buy a home in the
city. And not only are property prices in Cape Town the highest in the
country, in [2016 it ranked
third](https://kfcontent.blob.core.windows.net/research/323/documents/en/q2-2016-3986.pdf)
globally in terms of annual price increases.

And the prices keep going up, the latest being a R10 billion deal to sell and
prime coastal land between Clifton and Camps Bay, which many residents fear
will hike up the prices even more.

My friends and many other middle-class residents in Cape Town have been able
to find ways to work around the system and survive, but there is a growing
number of Capetonians who are barely surviving, and have found themselves
displaced and homeless.

**Land For People, Not For Profit**

On the top of Mountain Road in Woodstock a banner hangs from the windows of an
abandoned wing of Woodstock Community Hospital, emblazoned in bold red and
black with the words “Reclaim the City”—the name of a political movement
dedicated to fighting for affordable housing. The occupiers have named the
wing Cissie Gool House, after [the anti-apartheid political
activist](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Zainunnisa_Gool) often referred to as
Cape Town’s Joan of Arc.

![](https://globalvoices.org/wp-content/uploads/2017/10/Reclaim-the-
City-5-800x435.jpg)

Reclaim the City's slogan. PHOTO: Nyasha Kadandara. Used with permission.

Inside Cissie Gool House I found a combination of homeless families and
individuals who have converted the first floor of a ward into their home,
turning patient rooms into bachelor’s studios of a sort, and dilapidated
amenities into communal washrooms and kitchens and meetings rooms used for
educational purposes. On the walls of the hallway they have painted words of
affirmation—“Land for people, not for profit.”

At the back of the building, I found Shaneeka Abdullah hanging her laundry on
a washing line. After making one complaint too many about the run-down state
of her previous apartment, Shaneeka and her family had been abruptly evicted
by her landlady. The family of four slept in their car for three nights before
Abdullah discovered “Reclaim the City” through a Facebook post. The movement
was advertising accommodation for recent evictees and those struggling to find
affordable housing.

Shaneeka told me she “cried [her] eyes out” when she learned she would be able
to give a home to her two daughters, 11-year-old Tarana, and four-month-old
Almira. Standing in her converted room, she explained how she used a divider
to separate the living and sleeping areas. The former is kitted out with a gas
stove, a small fridge and makeshift cupboard, the sleeping area with a queen-
sized mattress on the floor and a dresser against the wall.

![](https://globalvoices.org/wp-content/uploads/2017/10/Reclaim-the-
City-3-800x492.jpg)

Know your rights – Jennifer Williams holds out a booklet on South African
Constitutional Rights. PHOTO: Nyasha Kadandara. Used with permission.

Abdullah’s living situation is not ideal, but she is determined to stay in
Cissie Gool House until the city can provide her with housing.

The[ South African
constitution](http://www.justice.gov.za/legislation/constitution/SAConstitution-
web-eng.pdf) states that everyone has the right to adequate housing, and
government must take reasonable measures to provide it from its pool of
available resources. The land on which Woodstock Hospital sits has been
unoccupied for 10 years and was earmarked for affordable housing. But despite
making commitments to using the site for housing, the owner, the Province, put
in a development application to build offices worth R100million. The rezoning
bid is part of what prompted Reclaim the City to[ occupy Woodstock
Hospital](http://reclaimthecity.org.za/wp-content/uploads/2017/03/Occupiers-
Statement-of-Demands.pdf) and the Helen Bowden Nurses’ Home, another property
earmarked to be used for affordable or transitional housing. Subsequently, the
rezoning application was withdrawn.

After pressure from a number of housing activist groups, the City identified
11 sites to build social and transitional housing within the inner city and
Woodstock Community Hospital is one of those sites. But in order to be
eligible, however, people need to be registered with the national housing
database.

“I’m too old to sleep in the streets now,” said 58 year-old Jennifer Williams
as she sat on her bed playing a card game with her neighbor, Ismail Rahim.
Jennifer is city girl, raised between Woodstock and adjacent Salt River;
living in the metro areas is all she has ever known. She’s been waiting for a
house for over 30 years. Jennifer’s is one of[ 373, 641
households](https://drive.google.com/open?id=0B_19uXqplHMBREFoZW5wNmliWTg) in
the national housing database still awaiting, and this backlog is set to grow
to 650,000 in the next 15 years.

![](https://globalvoices.org/wp-content/uploads/2017/10/Reclaim-the-
City-1-800x450.jpg)

Residents express their feeling about the Cape Town, the good and the bad.
PHOTO: Nyasha Kadandara. Used with permission.

While families continue to wait for the City to provide affordable housing,
those in immediate need are sent to relocation camps like Blikkiesdorp and
Wolwerivier, 30 km outside the city. Blikkiesdorp was established in 2008 as
part of the preparations for the 2010 football World Cup, and when translated
into English, means “Tin Can Town”. These settlements are far from urban
centers with employment opportunities and residents struggle to access public
transportation, or healthcare services.

“I hope I get attached to the new things that come along with the new
developments,” says Jennifer, who has seen Woodstock change drastically over
the last 30 years. But she accepts that some change is inevitable, and
sometimes it’s beneficial. She notes, for instance, the decline in crime that
occurred when the new shops came in. With a defiant look on her face, Jennifer
says that “as long at the city gives us our places to stay,” she’s okay with
the development.

Whether the city will, in fact, offer housing to people like Jennifer remains
a question. The City of Cape Town has had plenty of opportunities since the
end of apartheid to implement policies that promote inclusive urban
development, such[ rent control and inclusive city-wide
zoning](https://www.iol.co.za/weekend-argus/the-state-must-intervene-in-cape-
towns-land-and-housing-markets-2069493). But perhaps movements like Reclaim
the City will turn out to be David to the Goliath of gentrification and we’ll
start seeing housing and development for all—not just for a wealthy few.

_**Nyasha Kadandara is a Zimbabwean-born, journalist and award-winning
documentary filmmaker based in East Africa.**_

