[![](https://advox.globalvoices.org/wp-content/uploads/2017/09/Screen-
Shot-2017-09-29-at-7.19.10-PM-800x463.png)](https://earthobservatory.nasa.gov/NaturalHazards/view.php?id=88796)

Satellite imagery of Puerto Rico, before and after a blackout in 2016. Images
by National Aviation and Space Administration, licensed to public domain.

#### Global Voices Advocacy's Netizen Report offers an international snapshot
of challenges, victories, and emerging trends in Internet rights around the
world.

As societies across the globe grow increasingly dependent on mobile networks
for everything from entertainment to emergency services, a sudden
communication blackout — whether accidental or intentional — can swiftly
disrupt daily life and leave people cut off from critical services like
medical care.

This week, two populations on opposite sides of the globe are facing
communication shutdowns amid rapidly worsening humanitarian crises.

More than a week after Hurricane Maria pummeled Puerto Rico, bringing the
worst storm damage that the Caribbean island has seen in nearly a century,
[70% of telecommunications
networks](https://www.elnuevodia.com/negocios/empresas/nota/telecomunicaciones3050delservicioseharestablecido-2361611/)
are still inoperable and [nearly all
homes](https://www.newscientist.com/article/2149019-why-puerto-rico-still-has-
no-electrical-power-and-how-to-fix-it/) are reportedly still without
electricity

Alongside [life-threatening
shortages](http://www.cnn.com/2017/09/26/us/puerto-rico-maria-
recovery/index.html) of food, water and passable roadways, this has left the
majority of Puerto Ricans unable to communicate by phone or mobile networks,
or even to charge mobile phones or computers. Along with phone lines and
mobile phone towers, a major [fiber optic internet
cable](https://www.elnuevodia.com/tecnologia/tecnologia/nota/reconectanelcableultramarinoquedarainternetalaisla-2359925/)
was so badly damaged from flooding that it shut down altogether.

The cable, which was working at 25 percent of its normal capacity by September
23, provides the underlying digital communication infrastructure for
hospitals, police and fire departments and government agencies.

Residents of San Juan are rationing power from generators and other power-
generating devices, such as car batteries. As part of relief efforts,
telecommunication providers have set up [temporary WiFi
hotspots](https://www.theverge.com/2017/9/29/16372048/puerto-rico-hurricane-
maria-2017-electricity-water-food-communications-phone-internet-recovery) in
urban areas and [sent
satellites](https://www.elnuevodia.com/negocios/empresas/nota/telecomunicaciones3050delservicioseharestablecido-2361611/)
over the island to facilitate communication. _Visit_[ _this
page_](https://connect.clickandpledge.com/w/Form/cb4a3c78-5694-4324-bead-42c8ad94c1bf)
_to support recovery efforts._

**Bangladesh bans SIM card sales to Rohingya refugees**

Nearly 15,000 kilometers away from San Juan, authorities in Bangladesh this
week placed a [ban on the
sale](http://www.thehindu.com/news/international/bangladesh-imposes-mobile-
phone-ban-on-rohingya-refugees/article19746686.ece) of mobile phone SIM cards
to Rohingya refugees, citing ‘security concerns’. Companies, shops and even
individuals who violate the ban have been threatened with fines.

The ban compounds the challenges facing nearly 430,000 refugees who have
sought refuge in Bangladesh after fleeing military [‘clearance
operations’](http://www.cnn.com/2017/08/30/asia/rohingya-flee-
myanmar/index.html) that have destroyed more than one hundred Rohingya
villages in Myanmar’s Rakhine state. Violence began with
[clashes](https://www.irrawaddy.com/news/burma/muslim-militants-stage-major-
attack-rakhine.html) between the military and the Arakan Rohingya Salvation
Army militant group. Bangladeshi officials explained that their security
concerns arose from rumors that there were militants among the hundreds of
thousands of refugees (most of whom are children) who have crossed the border
in recent weeks.

The country’s telecommunications authority said it will lift the ban once
[biometric identity cards](https://globalvoices.org/2016/10/07/bangladesh-
introduces-smart-national-identity-cards/) — which have become a requirement
for Bangladeshis seeking SIM cards — are issued to the refugees, but this
process could take up to six months.

Tens of thousands of refugees are living without shelter in camps near
Bangladesh’s border with Myanmar and are [suffering from
shortages](https://www.washingtonpost.com/world/asia_pacific/bangladesh-
restricts-rohingya-refugees-starts-
immunization/2017/09/17/c1df6efe-9b6c-11e7-af6a-6555caaeb8dc_story.html?utm_term=.173955b18fd8)
of food, water, medicine and now, a lack of basic communication tools.

### **China fines local tech giants for sub-par content management**

With the next Communist Party Congress taking place in October, China’s
Cyberspace Administration [issued major
fines](https://www.cnbc.com/2017/09/25/china-fines-tech-giants-over-
censorship-blocks-whatsapp.html) to national tech companies Baidu, Tencent and
Sina, saying that the companies had failed to adequately control online
pornography, images of violence and messages promoting ethnic hatred. Although
the companies were reportedly assessed with maximum fines under the law, this
might amount just 500,000 yuan (about USD $76,000) — a tiny fraction of their
annual revenues, which number in the tens of billions.

### **Saudi Arabia opens up some messaging services (but not WhatsApp)**

Saudi Arabia [eased
restrictions](https://advox.globalvoices.org/2017/09/22/saudi-arabia-eases-
restrictions-on-messaging-apps-but-whatsapp-and-viber-are-still-blocked/) on
the use of VoIP and messaging applications, but maintained its ban on WhatsApp
and Viber. The government first began blocking the apps in 2013, and explained
the changes follow “modern trends” that “operators in the kingdom should
follow.” Saudi users can now make calls using apps including LINE, Snapchat,
FaceTime, Skype, Telegram and Tango.

### **Will Facebook let Russia store user data at home?**

Russian news agencies say local authorities will [block
Facebook](http://www.businessinsider.com/russia-threatens-to-block-facebook-
if-it-doesnt-store-user-information-in-the-country-2017-9) next year unless
the company begins storing the personal data of Russian citizens on servers in
Russia, a move that will make it easier for Russian authorities to obtain
citizens’ social media data. Communications regulatory agency Roskomnadzor
blocked access to LinkedIn last November following a court ruling that found
the company guilty of violating Russian data storage laws. [Twitter told
Roskomnadzor](https://advox.globalvoices.org/2017/02/21/twitter-walks-a-fine-
line-in-russia/) it aims to localize the personal data of Russian users by the
middle of 2018.

### **Jailed Moroccan journalist begins hunger strike**

Moroccan journalist Hamid El Mahdoui [began a hunger
strike](https://advox.globalvoices.org/2017/09/20/sentenced-to-one-year-in-
prison-for-inciting-protest-a-moroccan-journalist-goes-on-hunger-strike/) in
protest of an unfair trial after a court of appeals increased his prison
sentence from three months to one year. Mahdoui was arrested and charged for
giving a speech that authorities say incited others to participate in a July
protest and break the law, even though the right to protest and assembly is
guaranteed under the Moroccan Constitution and the Law on Public Assemblies.

### **New tool aims to curb online abuse**

In mid-September, developers launched a new source tool that aims to [curb
online abuse](https://www.apc.org/en/news/muavin-community-based-solution-
fighting-online-harassment-pakistan) in Pakistan. The app, known as Muavin,
allows users to create groups of allies on Twitter and Facebook so that they
may securely alert each other when they experience harassment.

### **New Research**

  * [Media Use in the Middle East, 2017 ](http://mideastmedia.org/survey/2017/)\- Northwestern University in Qatar
  * [We Cannot Be What We Cannot See](https://www.apc.org/en/news/we-cannot-be-what-we-cannot-see-genderitorg-maps-gaps-research-gender-and-information-society) – GenderIT.org

## [**Subscribe to the Netizen Report**](http://eepurl.com/Y-f11)

[Afef Abrougui](https://globalvoices.org/author/afef-abrougui/), [Ellery
Roberts Biddle](https://advox.globalvoices.org/author/ellery-roberts-biddle/),
[Leila Nachawati](https://advox.globalvoices.org/author/leila-nachawati/),
[Elizabeth Rivera, ](https://advox.globalvoices.org/author/erivera/)[Nevin
Thompson](https://advox.globalvoices.org/author/nevin-thompson/) and[ Sarah
Myers West](https://advox.globalvoices.org/author/sarahbmyers/) contributed to
this report.

