![](https://globalvoices.org/wp-
content/uploads/2017/08/IMG08485430-1024x620-1.jpg)

Reformist members of the Iranian parliament want to free the Green Movement
leaders under house arrest. Image from ICHRI and used with permission.

_This report was first published on the Center for Human Rights in
Iran[website](https://www.iranhumanrights.org/2017/08/reformist-mps-form-
committee-to-end-house-arrests-after-karroubis-hospitalization/). _

Reformist members of Iran’s Parliament have established the “[Committee to
Seek an End to House
Arrests](https://www.iranhumanrights.org/2016/12/karroubi-mousavi-rahnavard/)”
following the recent
[hospitalization](https://www.iranhumanrights.org/2017/08/immediate-release-
opposition-leaders/) of 79-year-old political opposition leader [Mehdi
Karroubi](https://www.iranhumanrights.org/2016/12/karroubi-mousavi-
rahnavard/).

“We want resolve this matter without any media sensationalism or political
hype,” said Ghasem Mirzaei Nikoo in an
[interview](http://www.ilna.ir/fa/tiny/news-520904)
[with](http://www.ilna.ir/fa/tiny/news-520904with) the state-funded Iranian
Labor News Agency on August 8, 2017. Nikoo is a member of the Parliament's
Hope Faction, which supports Iranian President Hassan Rouhani.

The reformist member of parliament added that the committee had already held a
preliminary meeting with Parliament Speaker Ali Larijani to discuss ways to
move forward.

Karroubi, along with fellow opposition leaders Mir Hossein Mousavi (75) and
his wife Zahra Rahnavard (71), has been isolated under state security in their
homes since 2011 for encouraging the peaceful protests of the Green Movement
against the results of the widely disputed 2009 presidential election. Both he
and Mousavi ran for the presidency in 2009.

Karroubi was taken to a
[hospital](https://www.iranhumanrights.org/2017/07/mps-say-efforts-continuing-
to-free-opposition-leaders-amid-karroubis-hospitalization/) in Tehran on July
24 for low blood pressure. Two days after he was admitted, he underwent a TIPS
procedure that corrected a vein blockage,
[according](http://www.kaleme.com/1396/05/04/klm-261200/) to his son, Hossein
Karroubi.

He was discharged on July 28, but within hours his condition took a turn for
the worse and he was taken back to the hospital where he received an
angiography on July 31.

![](https://globalvoices.org/wp-content/uploads/2017/08/2583.jpg)

Mir Hussein Mousavi (right) became the “leader” of the Green Movement after he
changed his campaign colours to be the same as those of the protests against
what millions perceived were fraudulent elections. Mousavi, his wife Zahra
Rahnavard (middle), and another reformist candidate, Mehdi Karroubi (left),
were arrested for “inciting sedition.”

President Hassan Rouhani, who promised to work towards releasing political
prisoners during his 2013 election campaign, has been silent on Karroubi’s
hospitalization. On August 1 his government spokesman Mohammad Bagher Nobakht
expressed hope for his recovery.

“While we wish these dear individuals will be healthy, we hope nothing will
happen to upset their families or the people,”
[said](http://www.isna.ir/news/96051006061/) Nobakht. “We should make efforts
to protect national interests and bring peace to society.”

“The door is open [for a resolution],” he added. “The supreme leader has not
declared any solution impossible.”

According to comments by officials familiar with the case, Supreme Leader Ali
Khamenei has long insisted that the three must
[apologize](https://www.iranhumanrights.org/2017/02/irans-supreme-leader-
rejecting-offer-of-national-reconciliation/) for their role in the peaceful
mass protests of 2009, which were violently repressed by the state.

Gholamreza Heidari, a member of the “Committee to Seek an End to House
Arrests,” [told](http://www.isna.ir/news/96051610028) the Iranian Labor News
Agency he was disappointed in Rouhani’s lack of action.

“It is paradoxical that the people have demanded an end [to the house arrests]
and the president himself has made some favorable statements, but we are not
aware of him taking any action in this regard,” he said:

> We are not saying that only the president should do something about this,
> but after all he is the head of the Supreme National Security Council and he
> has made some promises in his 2013 and 2017 campaigns, and under the
> constitution he has a duty to protect the basic rights of the people.

During the campaign that led to his [re-
election](https://www.iranhumanrights.org/2017/05/newly-reelected-rouhani-
abandons-promise-to-end-six-year-house-arrest-of-opposition-leaders/) in May
2017, Rouhani indirectly suggested he wanted the case resolved as crowds
chanted for an end to the house arrests. “We will go to the voting booths to
end captivity,” he [said](http://www.isna.ir/news/96022616737) at a rally in
Zanjan on May 15.

Rouhani was more direct during his 2013 presidential campaign.

“We can provide conditions such that over the next year, individuals who were
imprisoned or put under house arrest for the 2009 events are released,” he
[said](http://www.hamshahrionline.ir/details/214011) at a campaign rally at
Sharif University in Tehran on May 13, 2013.

Several legislators as well as political and civil rights activists tried to
visit Karroubi at the Rajaei Cardiovascular, Medical & Research Center in
Tehran while he was receiving treatment in late July. Many were [turned
away](https://www.iranhumanrights.org/2017/08/prominent-activists-defy-state-
ban-on-visiting-hospitalized-opposition-leader-mehdi-karroubi/).

Karroubi was discharged from the hospital and returned to house arrest on
August 10, 2017.

