Argentinean musician, [Gustavo Cerati](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cerati),
who became popular in Latin America as the lead singer and guitar player of
the band [Soda Stereo](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Soda_Stereo), suffered a
stroke caused by cerebrovascular disease after performing a show in the city
of Caracas, Venezuela on May 15. The musician had surgery, and is currently in
a coma. After his condition became public, Twitter became one of the means of
circulation of news and rumors about the musician. The hashtag
[#cerati](http://search.twitter.com/search?q=%23cerati) became one of the most
popular worldwide, and others such as
[#fuerzacerati](http://search.twitter.com/search?q=%23fuerzacerati) (stay
strong Cerati) also came up in local versions of hashtags rankings.

[![](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2010/05/cerati.jpg)](http://www.flickr.com/photos/annais/513772964/)

Photo of Gustavo Cerati by annais and used under a Creative Commons license.

On Twitter, the large number of messages published by users were words of
support for the popular rock star. For example, Erika Vargas (@_erikilla_)
[writes](http://twitter.com/_erikilla_/status/14388392935):

> sigo orando por @cerati mandandole la mejor energia y mucha fuerza!!!

I'm still praying for @cerati sending him the best energy and strength!!

There was also a lot of room for rumors. At times, talk about the death of the
singer came up, something that was quickly denied in the media. However, many
journalists from traditional media published news about Cerati's health
condition through their Twitter updates.

In the case of blogs, something curious happened. Before [the death of the
popular Argentinean singer,
Sandro,](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2010/01/08/argentina-romantic-singing-
legend-sandro-passes-away/) Clarin newspaper, the most popular in Argentina,
published[ a special issue
[es]](http://www.taringa.net/posts/offtopic/3974274/Sandro-Muerto,-Suplemento-
Espectaculos-21_11_2009.html) on its website they had prepared in case he
died, something that happened weeks later. We need to take into consideration
that it's normal for the media to prepare obituaries of people who are in risk
of dying as a way of planning the publishing of content. Since that event, the
blog _UDN [es]_ published [an entry where, by using an images editor, they
created a fake cover of Clarin's Showbiz
section](http://hombremuerdeperro.blogspot.com/2010/05/premonicion.html), that
read “goodbye Cerati”. The image spread through Twitter, where some users took
it seriously and believed it was another Clarin leak. Hours later, [the
newspaper reported “actions” against them
[es]](http://www.clarin.com/diario/2010/05/19/um/m-02197604.htm). While the
blog that published the “fake cover” maintains a pro-government position and
against Clarin newspaper, it is also true that the entry made it clear it was
a joke, and not a leak of Clarin newspaper's material.

