[![](https://globalvoices.org/wp-content/uploads/2019/03/Kabal-Shah-sits-in-
his-barbershop-in-Kabul-taking-a-small-photo-of-his-brother-who-was-killed-by-
a-Taliban-claimed-suicide-bombing.-Photo-by-Ezzatullah-
Mehrdad-800x531.jpg)](https://globalvoices.org/2019/03/25/afghan-government-
is-ready-for-talks-with-the-taliban-but-are-their-victims/kabal-shah-sits-in-
his-barbershop-in-kabul-taking-a-small-photo-of-his-brother-who-was-killed-by-
a-taliban-claimed-suicide-bombing-photo-by-ezzatullah-mehrdad/)

Kabal Shah sits in his barbershop in Kabul, holding a pucture of his brother
Adel who was killed by in a Taliban-claimed suicide bombing. Photo by
Ezzatullah Mehrdad, used with permission.

Kabal Shah, 52, watches the news on the peace talks between the U.S. and the
Taliban group in his barbershop. Every time the news anchor reports on
development in peace talks, Kabal Shah recalls the memory of his brother, Adel
Shah.

One day in 2017, Adel was on the way to his barbershop when Kabal heard a huge
explosion. He called Adel several times until a doctor at Wazir Akhbar Khan
Hospital picked up the phone. The doctor pronounced his brother dead.

“We are powerless” to seek justice, says Kabal Shah who lost his leg during
the civil war of the 90s. “There are thousands of us that nobody sees.” Kabal
says that when a Taliban suicide bomber targeted a convoy of U.S. soldiers,
the attack claimed the life of his 24-year-old brother. But he hopes that the
same does not happen to other young Afghans like Adel.

U.S. envoys and representatives of the Taliban are attempting to negotiate a
way out of the war they've been fighting for 17 years, during which thousands
of Afghan civilians have been killed and wounded. But in these peace talks,
the names of civilian victims are seldom heard.

About 31,000 civilians have died from 2001 to 2016, [according
to](https://watson.brown.edu/costsofwar/costs/human/civilians/afghan) the
Watson Institute of Brown University. An additional 41,000 civilians have been
wounded.

Crossfire, improvised explosive devices, assassinations, bombings, nighttime
raids on homes of suspected insurgents, and airstrikes have been blamed for
the high civilian casualty numbers.

According to the UN Assistance Mission in Afghanistan, 5,272 civilians were
killed and injured in 2017 alone. Still more were killed and injured in 2018,
the deadliest year of the war, according to the UN
[report](https://unama.unmissions.org/civilian-deaths-afghan-
conflict-2018-highest-recorded-level-%E2%80%93-un-
report?fbclid=IwAR3V7e7y9XiwHfTx_3XetLXuS_oL6YZ1sUFNRhbMi6eOvFKj-09yhAD7xTk):
10,993 civilian casualties, including a record number of children.

UN reports attribute at least 63 percent of civilian casualties in 2018 to
various insurgent groups, including the Taliban and the Islamic State. The
blame for 24 percent of civilian casualties falls on Afghan and American
militaries.

Aziz Ahmad Tassal, the director of the Civilian Protection Advocacy Group,
urges the Afghan government and international community to pay better
attention to the victims. “They are stuck; they are hungry and will do
whatever it takes to feed their kids and family members,” says Tassal. “They
have been ignored and suffered unbearable pain while going through this
endless struggle.”

As an example, Tassal tells the story of an 18-year-old girl, the lone
survivor of an airstrike in Nangarhar province which killed her entire family.
Before the airstrike, the girl had been engaged. But after the tragedy, the
family of her fiancé refused to accept the disabled bride who had lost an eye
in the explosion. Now she lives with her uncle who demands that she pays him
back for what he's spent on her sustenance.

“If we don’t heal their broken hearts and prosecute the perpetrators, what is
peace for, then?” asks Tassal. “Whoever caused the causalities must be
prosecuted.”

The Taliban-claimed suicide bombing in Kabul on July 24, 2017,
[killed](https://www.theguardian.com/world/2017/jul/24/afghanistan-dozens-
dead-kabul-bombing-politicians) at least 38 people, including Najiba Bahar
Hussaini, an employee of the Ministry of Mines and Petroleum. Her and Husain
Rezai were engaged and planned to marry after two years of romantic
relationship.

“In full confidence and despite the civilian victims, the Taliban still sees
the casualties as justifiable,” says Rezai. “If you have a problem with the
U.S., why does your fight against them [the Taliban] keep claiming the lives
of ordinary Afghans?”

“Peace does not matter to me, personally,” says Rezai. “I just don’t want to
see any more people suffer and lose their loved ones.” He says he hoped that
the International Criminal Court would persecute the Taliban for murdering
civilians, but now he's all but abandoned his hope.

Latifa Sultani, a liaison for Afghanistan’s Independent Human Rights
Commission (AIHRC), says that the victims demand an unconditional end to the
war, not a peace deal which would grant impunity to the perpetrators.

“AIHRC has advocated for compensation to pay the victims and for the
persecution of perpetrators,” Sultani says. “Those who have committed crimes
must bear the responsibility, at the very least they should apologize.”

Sultani explains that without serving justice and addressing the victims’
grievances, peace talks might eventually result in only a provisional end to
the war without ever reaching lasting peace. “Without paying attention to the
victims, pain and anger will pass on from one generation to another.”

AIHRC has frequently called for including the representatives of civilian
victims in the peace talks, as there is a tangible danger of them seeking
violent revenge after failing to bring their attackers to conventional
justice.

But for some relatives of the victims, only an answer for their losses would
calm them down. Ghulam Mohammad, in his 50s, was listening to a radio news
broadcast on December 31 last year, when a group of armed men stormed his
brother's house.

“They were uniformed armed men, with a fleet of drones supporting them,” says
Ghulam Mohammad in a hotel in Gardez, Afghanistan’s Paktia province. “I
learned later that a caravan of 50 vehicles had arrived from Paktika Province
[neighboring province of Paktia] to Zurmat [district of Paktia where Ghulam
Mohammad lives].”

Ghulam Mohammad rushed to his brother’s house. He found his brother, Naim
Faruqi, and his two sons killed by shots in the face. Ghulam's nephews were
students at local universities.

Then, a group of armed men lined up Ghulam Mohammad's family on the balcony of
his own house. One of the armed men came forward and told Ghulam Mohammad that
they would spare his and his family's lives.

Recently, CIA-sponsored Khost Protection Forces
[carried](https://www.nytimes.com/2018/12/31/world/asia/cia-afghanistan-
strike-force.html) out night raids in the region. Allegedly, it was the KPF
that [raided](https://www.afghanistan-analysts.org/khost-protection-force-
accused-of-fresh-killings-six-men-shot-dead-in-zurmat/) Ghulam Mohammad and
his brother's houses.

Ghulam Mohammad reached out to the local governments in Zurmat District and
Paktia Province, but they refused to supply any information about the
operation and those who had raided his brothers’ house.

[![](https://globalvoices.org/wp-content/uploads/2019/03/Ghulam-Mohammad-
takes-photos-of-his-cousins-who-were-allegedly-killed-by-a-C.I.A.-sponsored-
militant.-Photo-by-Mohammad-
Imran.jpg)](https://globalvoices.org/2019/03/25/afghan-government-is-ready-
for-talks-with-the-taliban-but-are-their-victims/ghulam-mohammad-takes-photos-
of-his-cousins-who-were-allegedly-killed-by-a-c-i-a-sponsored-militant-photo-
by-mohammad-imran/)

Ghulam Mohammad holds a picture of his nephews who were killed by a night raid
in their houses in the eastern region of Afghanistan. Photo by Mohammad Imran.

“We demand an answer. What was their crime? I am ready to appear before any
court that prosecutes me if my family had committed a crime,” says Ghulam
Mohammad. “At least someone should answer. Is being a student a crime?”

