[![Global Voices Podcast
Homepage](http://static.globalvoices.s3.amazonaws.com/img/special/gv-podcast-
subscribe-logo.png)](https://globalvoicesonline.org/-/special/global-voices-
podcast/)[![Subscribe in
iTunes](http://static.globalvoices.s3.amazonaws.com/img/special/gv-podcast-
subscribe-itunes.png)](http://itunes.apple.com/ca/podcast/global-voices-
podcast/id74941523)

Hello world!

In this edition of the Global Voices podcast you can hear how women in Egypt
are using technology to fight harassment, and what our Global Voices authors
and editors got up to at the [Mozilla Festival](https://mozillafestival.org)
in London.

We also mark [World Aids Day](http://www.worldaidsday.org/) by speaking to
HIV/AIDS activists in Kenya and Egypt about the special work they do.

**Technology to empower women**

![](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2011/11/100harass.jpg)First we take a look at harassment of
women in the streets of Egypt. Engy Ghozlan in Cairo is a young woman who took
matters in her own hands to fight social acceptance of sexual harassment by
using mapping technology and the voices of women who speak up about what
happens to them on the street. The result is
[Harassmap](http://harassmap.org/). Global Voices author, [Maria Grabowski
Kjær](https://globalvoicesonline.org/author/maria-grabowski-kjaer/) spoke to
Engy about her work in support of women's safety and comfort in public.

**World Aids Day**

December 1st is World Aids Day. A time to think about the many people who
living with HIV or AIDS and consider what can be done to support them and
their carers. I had a chat with a two people working hard to improve
conditions and raise awareness.[![](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2011/11/100ahmed.jpg)](http://rwac-egypt.blogspot.com/)

[Ahmed Awadalla](http://rwac-egypt.blogspot.com/) is in Egypt. He has worked
with Cairo Family Planning and Development Association and is now with the
Egyptian Initiative for Personal Rights. He talks about stigma and how the
current uprising in Egypt is actually hindering support for communities at
risk.

[](https://rising.globalvoicesonline.org/blog/2011/03/02/blogging-positively-
interview-with-blogger-leah-okeyo/)

[![](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2011/11/100leah.jpg)Leah
Okeyoh](https://rising.globalvoicesonline.org/blog/2011/03/02/blogging-
positively-interview-with-blogger-leah-okeyo/) is a community activist,
blogger, author, and [World Pulse
correspondent](http://www.worldpulse.com/user/105). She is co-founder of two
women's organizations, Jacolo Rural Women Response to HIV/AIDS, and Positive
Action for Change (PACHO). She is also a participant in the [“Blogging
Positively”](https://rising.globalvoicesonline.org/projects/bloggingpositively)
project of Rising Voices. We talked to her about the Kenyan health care system
and her hopes for the future.

You too can be involved with [Blogging
Positively](https://rising.globalvoicesonline.org/blog/2011/11/30/blogging-
positively-tweeting-world-aids-day-2011/) if you're interested in citizen
media related to HIV/AIDS. If you're on Twitter for World Aids Day, use the
hashtag [#BlogPos](https://twitter.com/#!/search/%23blogpos) so we can find
you.

**Global Voices out and about**

[![Mozilla Festival Science Fair ](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2011/12/mozfestsciencefair-375x248.jpg)](http://www.flickr.com/photos/mozillaeu/6312554547/in/gallery-
mozilladrumbeat-72157627965849097/)

Mozilla Festival Science Fair by Mozilla in Europe on Flickr (CC-BY-2.0)

London was host to the Mozilla Festival on “media, freedom, and the web” in
November. Global Voices was represented by an awesome team at the Science
Fair. With so much GV-goodness in one place, I had to ask them what they were
up to.

[Emma Brewin](https://globalvoicesonline.org/author/emma-brewin/) is our
Deputy Editor of citizen media organisation. [Marta
Cooper](https://globalvoicesonline.org/author/marta-cooper/) is an author who
is also on the Board of Global Voices. [Paula
Goes](https://globalvoicesonline.org/author/paulagoes/) is our Multilingual
editor who was showing a colleague around the event via a live video
connection. Amira is possibly the youngest interviewer so far on the Global
Voices podcast at 10 years old. She interviewed our Iraq author [Salam
Adil](https://globalvoicesonline.org/author/salam-adil/).

![Global Voices at the Mozilla Festival](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2011/12/mozfestgv-375x93.jpg)

Emma Brewin, Marta Cooper, Salam Adil, and Paula Goes

Well, that’s all we can squeeze into this edition of the Global Voices
Podcast. Thank you all for listening and thanks to all of our contributors and
interviewees. We’ll be back next month but you can always drop by on any of
our social media spaces like [Twitter](https://twitter.com/#!/globalvoices) or
[Facebook](https://www.facebook.com/globalvoicesonline) and say hi!

**Music credits**

_In the podcast you can hear lots of lovely Creative Commons music. If you
want to find out more about these artists here are the links. Thanks to[Orb
Gettarr](http://opsound.org/artist/orbgettarr/) for the atmospheric Return of
the Atlanteans Lemurian Candidate, to [Mark
Cotton](http://mcfontaine.posterous.com/) for his Spiritualized Homage, to
[Superbus](http://freemusicarchive.org/music/Superbus/Debut/)[ feat.
NS](http://freemusicarchive.org/music/Superbus_feat_NS/) for Fujjad! Most of
the music was found via [OpSound.Org](http://opsound.org/), [The Free Music
Archive](http://freemusicarchive.org/) or direct from the artists. Thanks also
to all of the wonderful voice over performances and clips that help to glue
the podcast together._

[![Global Voices Podcast
Homepage](http://static.globalvoices.s3.amazonaws.com/img/special/gv-podcast-
subscribe-logo.png)](https://globalvoicesonline.org/-/special/global-voices-
podcast/)[![Subscribe in
iTunes](http://static.globalvoices.s3.amazonaws.com/img/special/gv-podcast-
subscribe-itunes.png)](http://itunes.apple.com/ca/podcast/global-voices-
podcast/id74941523)

<http://www.archive.org/download/GvPodcast6/GV6.mp3>

Podcast: [Play in new
window](http://www.archive.org/download/GvPodcast6/GV6.mp3 "Play in new
window") | [Download](http://www.archive.org/download/GvPodcast6/GV6.mp3
"Download")

Subscribe: [Apple Podcasts](https://itunes.apple.com/ca/podcast/global-voices-
podcast-
global/id74941523?mt=2&ls=1#episodeGuid=http%3A%2F%2Fglobalvoicesonline.org%2F%3Fp%3D274063
"Subscribe on Apple Podcasts") |
[Android](https://subscribeonandroid.com/globalvoices.org/feed/podcast/
"Subscribe on Android") | [RSS](https://globalvoices.org/feed/podcast/
"Subscribe via RSS")

