![](https://globalvoices.org/wp-content/uploads/2017/07/akram-874x492.jpg)

Artist Akram Al-Halabi in his studio apartment in Vienna. May 5, 2017. Photo
by AJ Naddaff/SyriaUntold.

_This story was originally written[for Syria
Untold](http://www.syriauntold.com/en/2017/07/akram-al-halabi-looking-harmony-
nature-humanity/) by [AJ Naddaf](http://www.syriauntold.com/en/writer/aj-
naddaf/), an Arab studies and political science student, French teacher, and
research assistant for the Arab Studies chair at Davidson College. It is
republished here as part of a partnership agreement._

Akram al Halabi is an artist from the mountainous plateau of [Majdal
Shams](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Majdal_Shams), the largest of the four
remaining Druze-Syrian communities on the Israeli-occupied part of the Syrian
Golan Heights. Despite coming from a contentious region, Al-Halabi does not
let politics drive his art work. Rather, he utilizes art as a medium to
express his search for harmony between nature and humanity.

Born into a family of several artists, Al-Halabi’s art career began as a child
when he would paint and draw under the tutelage of an art teacher from his
village. From 1997 until 2000, he studied drawing and painting at Bayt Al-
Fann. Then he studied at the Faculty of Fine Art at Damascus University
(2000-2005). In 2003, he participated in the summer academy of [Darat al
Funun](http://daratalfunun.org/), supervised by Professor [Marwan Kassab
Bashi](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Marwan_Kassab-Bachi) in Amman, Jordan.

While in school, however, his eyes were set on exhibiting and continuing his
art elsewhere. The incessant political pressure of his identity in Israel
motivated long hours dedicated to mastering the meticulous techniques of
perspective, light and shape behind his award-winning art. His goal was
simple: to create art in a place where he wouldn't have to move from
checkpoint to checkpoint.

Upon completing his studies at the Faculty of Fine Art, he became the first
from the Golan Heights to win a scholarship to continue his studies in Berlin.
But he was denied travel by the Syrian government simply because of his
uncontrollable statelessness. After [Israel officially annexed the Golan
Heights in
1981](https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/2012/dec/15/archive-1981-israel-
annexes-golan-heights), the year Al-Halabi was born, it began regarding
Syrians of the Golan as “residents of Israel” but not citizens. Al-Halabi had
been allowed to study in Damascus even though he was living in Israeli-
occupied Golan because of a program supervised by the UN and made possible
through an agreement between Syria and Israel.

![](https://globalvoices.org/wp-content/uploads/2017/07/snowflakes-1.jpg)

Snowflakes Installation, Document, 784 Invoice Papers. Photo courtesy of Akram
Al-Halabi; all rights reserved to the author.

Despite the hassle, Al Halabi persevered. In 2007, two years after he
graduated, he won another scholarship for his art through the “[One World
Scholarship of the [Vienna-based] Afro-Asian-Institute,”](http://www.aai-
salzburg.at/en_students_scholarships.htm) which supports 10-15 students each
year from Africa, Asia and Latin America who have a developmental focus in
their studies. He finally came to attend the Academy of Fine Arts of Vienna,
and finished his studies with distinction in 2012 with the class of Professor
[Erwin Bohatsch.](http://www.albertina.at/en/erwin_bohatsch)

In addition to his academic study of art, Al-Halabi has participated in sundry
exhibitions across Europe. His work has also been collected by many private
collectors in the European Union and the Middle East, as well as in The
British Museum, London, and the _Kupferstichkabinett_ collection in Vienna.

Grappling with his own identity in an Austrian context, while at the Academy
of Fine Arts of Vienna, he was inspired to travel from 2009 to 2012 all over
Europe, to Palestine and Israel, and back to his village. During this journey,
Al-Halabi asked people, whom he met randomly, to define themselves at the
moment of their meeting and to write this definition on individual papers used
for invoicing. He called the project “Snowflakes,” later adding small
geometric forms using pliers to create lines in the shape of fingerprints and
snowflakes.

![](https://globalvoices.org/wp-content/uploads/2017/07/all-people-web-
snowflakes.jpg)

Some of the people out of the 800 or so who have participated in Akram al-
Halabi’s ‘Snowflakes’ project from 2009 to 2012. Photo courtesy of Akram al-
Halabi; all rights reserved to the author.

With the dye of these carbon papers turning blue upon pressure, each
participant received a copy of their work. “There are so many people who
actually want and need to say something to you, especially old people in
parks,” he told SyriaUntold. “I was motivated because I’m born undefined — and
I’m still undefined — but I came to understand myself more through
understanding others. If you go to the streets and begin talking to strangers,
you will be amazed at how some people become your friends and can understand
you.”

He further commented on the danger of being stuck in certain boxes. For
example, many Israelis and Palestinians were unwilling to participate in the
project simply because Al-Halabi did not align with their religious ideals.

The open-minded, inquisitive and amicable spirit from which the project was
conducted is what best describes Al-Halabi’s personality. In 2010, while
traveling back to his village every summer to see his family, he created a
performance project called “Love Comes First,” in which 200 people from the
Golan Heights wrote with their bodies the statement: “Love Comes First” (in
Arabic, _Al-Mahabbah Awwalan_ ).

![](https://globalvoices.org/wp-content/uploads/2017/07/love-comes-first-
performanc-in-golan-hieghts-2010_2.jpg)

Akram al-Halabi’s ‘Love Comes First’ on the football field of Majdal Shams
village, occupied Golan Heights, 2010 Photo by Nihad Awaidat and Diala Madah
courtesy of Akram al-Halabi; all rights reserved to the authors.

The next year, as the Syrian uprising erupted, Al-Halabi watched with suspense
from his television screen. “Because I had lived in Damascus and some of the
areas most affected by the revolution, I had to produce art. I do not have the
power to do anything though. I can just look and show what is happening
through another lens,” he told SyriaUntold.

Taking gruesome images from his computer that were widely blasted in the
media, Al-Halabi conceived the project “Cheek,” erasing the images by adding
English words and Arabic letters around them, sometimes sketching the image’s
most basic outline. “I wanted to make a third level of perception, making
connections between word and image to the viewer,” explained Al-Halabi. His
reprints list traits that appear in the image by their names, simply to remind
the audience that they exist: “Ear, Eye, Brow, Window, Blood, Nose, Child,
Neck, Throat, Chin, Shoulder, Heart, Mother, Fingers, Cheek…”

![](https://globalvoices.org/wp-content/uploads/2017/07/houla-874x492.jpg)

‘Never Forget’ portrays the Houla Massacre in which 34 women and 49 children
were slaughtered by Syrian regime forces. It is part of the ‘Cheek’ project.
Photo courtesy of Akram Al-Halabi; all rights reserved to the author.

The project represents a story of poetry in space, removing the horror from
viral blood-stained pictures. It had been conceived between 2011 and 2013,
during the first couple years of Syria’s revolution, before the conflict
became an all-out proxy war. For many nights he could not sleep until “Cheek”
was completed, and only then was he able to move on with other projects.

![](https://globalvoices.org/wp-content/uploads/2017/07/cheeks-874x492.jpg)

Akrab Massacre/Cheek 1, Visual writing, Digital work – 2013. Photo courtesy of
Akram Al-Halabi; all rights reserved to the author.

The wide range of mediums and themes in Al-Halabi’s work are akin to his
conception of identity, as something malleable and evolving overtime, like a
snowflake. Above all, Al-Halabi believes that geographical identities are
meaningless markers for defining not only people, but himself. What’s most
important for him is to experience life not as boring or straightforward, but
to accept its complexities, and to find harmony in his days. Creating art is
one way for him to express this.

Yet the power of engaging in deep conversations, reading good literature,
swimming, observing nature’s beauty (like his fascination with dragonflies),
and acting in theatre performances are all expressions that give his life
meaning, and make him feel defined. “Don’t forget to enjoy your day,” Al-
Halabi told SyriaUntold. “That’s more important than this article anyway.”

![](https://globalvoices.org/wp-
content/uploads/2017/07/dragonfly-e1499766118725-1024x346.jpg)

Dragonfly, B4, oil on canvas. 2017 Photo courtesy of Akram Al-Halabi; all
rights reserved to the author.

In November, Al-Halabi will attend the opening of a group exhibition featuring
his works in Japan: “[Diaspora
Now](http://www.kenbi.pref.gifu.lg.jp/english/page5368.php)” at the Museum of
Fine Arts in Gifu (11/11/2017 – 8/1/2018). See more of his polyvalent artwork
in his portfolio [here](http://akramalhalabi.blogspot.fr/p/short-
portfolio.html).

