_This post by[Todd Reubold ](https://ensia.com/about/people/treubold/)__was_[
___originally published_ __](https://ensia.com/videos/watch-one-mans-mission-
protect-iraqs-rivers-future-generations/)_on_[ _Ensia.com_](http://ensia.com/)
_, a magazine that highlights international environmental solutions in action.
It is republished here as part of a content sharing agreement._  
![](https://ensia.com/republished.php?title=Watch%3A%20One%20man%E2%80%99s%20mission%20to%20protect%20Iraq%E2%80%99s%20rivers%20for%20future%20generations)

For the past seven years, Nabil Musa has been traveling — often times on a
paddle board or in a raft — around the Kurdistan region of Iraq on a one-man
mission to promote the importance of clean waterways for the current and
future generations.

In this documentary by [_Emily Kinskey_](https://www.emilykinskey.com/) _,_ we
follow Musa as he explains his relationship to the rivers in his region and
the effect pollution has in his community. “I really wanted to do something
about the river we lost when I was a child,” Musa said.

Experts throughout the country fear that decades of war, pollution, uncharted
development and damming mean a water crisis in Iraq is imminent.

Musa is part of the NGO [Waterkeepers Iraq](http://www.waterkeepersiraq.org) —
an affiliate of [Waterkeeper Alliance](http://waterkeeper.org/) — which
advocates and works “to protect the rivers, streams and waterways of Iraq and
support local communities in the sustainable use of these natural resources.”

Toward the end of the video, Musa sums up the urgency at the heart of his work
by asking, “If we don’t have this water, how can we survive?”

_This video was produced, filmed and edited for Ensia by_[ _Emily
Kinskey_](https://www.emilykinskey.com/) _, a documentary filmmaker and
multimedia journalist currently based in Erbil, Iraq. Her work focuses on
underreported and persecuted subcultures, and is characterized by
collaborative videography and innovative multimedia techniques that assists
oppressed communities in framing their narrative._

