[![](https://globalvoices.org/wp-
content/uploads/2017/10/Поляницький_регіональний_парк._Скелі_Довбуша-800x471.jpg)](https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:%D0%9F%D0%BE%D0%BB%D1%8F%D0%BD%D0%B8%D1%86%D1%8C%D0%BA%D0%B8%D0%B9_%D1%80%D0%B5%D0%B3%D1%96%D0%BE%D0%BD%D0%B0%D0%BB%D1%8C%D0%BD%D0%B8%D0%B9_%D0%BF%D0%B0%D1%80%D0%BA._%D0%A1%D0%BA%D0%B5%D0%BB%D1%96_%D0%94%D0%BE%D0%B2%D0%B1%D1%83%D1%88%D0%B0.jpg)

Rock-cave complex “Dovbush Rocks”, Ivano-Frankivsk Oblast, photo by Pavlo
Pivovar, via Wikimedia Commons CC BY-SA.

Ukrainian Wikipedia has given awards to the top 11 photographers in the
national segment of the international photo contest “Wiki Loves Earth” which
celebrates natural monuments and protected areas.

The award ceremony took place [October 7, 2017 at the Museum of Natural
Sciences in Kiev](https://wikimediaukraine.wordpress.com/2017/10/09/wle-
results/), and included an exhibition of winning photos.

The Ukrainian section of the worldwide competition received over 15,000 photos
depicting over 1,860 natural heritage subjects by 356 participants during the
month of May. About a thousand of these pictures are already used to
illustrate Wikipedia articles in different languages.

[![](https://globalvoices.org/wp-
content/uploads/2017/10/WLE_Ukraine_2017_Awards_Ceremony-54-800x533.jpg)](https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File%3AWLE_Ukraine_2017_Awards_Ceremony-54.jpg)

Participants in the award ceremony for Ukrainian portion the “Wiki Loves Earth
2017″ Competition in the National Museum of Natural Sciences in Kiev, October
7, 2017. Photo by Anna Kondratyuk via Wikimedia Commons, CC BY-SA.

All winners received memorial diplomas and other prizes: souvenirs with the
competition logo or gift certificates for online stores.

The prizes went to the [authors of the 11 photos that received the highest
jury scores](http://wikilovesearth.org.ua/2017/09/top11/), as well as contest
participants who photographed the most objects and received the most points in
the overall score.

Several other awards were handed out by other organisations who linked up with
the competition. For instance the staff of [Holosiivskyi National Nature
Park](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Holosiivskyi_National_Nature_Park), which
is located within the Kiev metropolitan area, selected the three best photos
submitted to the competition [made within the confines of the
park](http://wikilovesearth.org.ua/2017/10/npp-holosiiv/).

In addition, the national contest also included several special award
categories:

  * [“Unpleasant Discovery”, documenting destruction of natural habitats](http://wikilovesearth.org.ua/2017/07/epl-nomination-winners/), initiated by environmental NGOs.
  * ‘Shedding light’ on subjects [whose photos were lacking](http://wikilovesearth.org.ua/2017/10/osvitlyneni3/) on Wikipedia
  * [Best photos of wildlife](http://wikilovesearth.org.ua/2017/10/best-animals/), and
  * [Best photo from Kiev](http://wikilovesearth.org.ua/2017/10/kyiv2017-kmda/)

[![](https://globalvoices.org/wp-
content/uploads/2017/10/Молния_на_Каменной_могиле-800x530.jpg)](https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:%D0%9C%D0%BE%D0%BB%D0%BD%D0%B8%D1%8F_%D0%BD%D0%B0_%D0%9A%D0%B0%D0%BC%D0%B5%D0%BD%D0%BD%D0%BE%D0%B9_%D0%BC%D0%BE%D0%B3%D0%B8%D0%BB%D0%B5.jpg)

Lightning over n ature site Kamyana Mohyla in Zaporizhia Oblast. Photo by
Anatoliy Volkov via Wikimedia Commons, CC BY-SA.

Wikipedians from 36 countries took part in the “Wiki Loves Earth” photo
competition worldwide. The top winning photos of natural heritage sites – such
as nature reserves, landscape conservation areas, national parks and
scenic/landscape areas are featured in a [joint gallery on Wikimedia
Commons](https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/Commons:Wiki_Loves_Earth_2017/Winners).

Organizers and contributors have been using the hashtag
[#WikiLovesEart](https://twitter.com/hashtag/WikiLovesEarth?src=hash)h to
publish photos and promote a spirit of sharing. They managed to gather over
137,000 photos in total.

[![](https://globalvoices.org/wp-
content/uploads/2017/10/Косарі_в_дельті_ДУнаю-800x560.jpg)](https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/Commons:Wiki_Loves_Earth_2017/Winners#/media/File:%D0%9A%D0%BE%D1%81%D0%B0%D1%80%D1%96_%D0%B2_%D0%B4%D0%B5%D0%BB%D1%8C%D1%82%D1%96_%D0%94%D0%A3%D0%BD%D0%B0%D1%8E.jpg)

Eurasian spoonbill (Platalea leucorodia) in Danube Biosphere Reserve, photo by  
Sergey Ryzhkov via Wikimedia Commons, CC BY-SA.

About one fifth of the participating countries are from [Central and Eastern
Europe](https://globalvoices.org/-/world/eastern-central-europe/), including
Bulgaria whose national competition was covered in [a previous Global Voices
post](https://globalvoices.org/2017/08/03/bulgarian-wikipedia-announces-
national-entries-for-wiki-loves-earth-photo-contest/).

