![](https://globalvoices.org/wp-
content/uploads/2017/09/CalfOfNaumutheCow-800x450.jpg)

A new-born naumuthe calf. When full grown, this cattle breed measures
equivalent to nine closed fists from hoof to hump. Image: Sanjib Chaudhary.

The [Achhami](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Achham_cattle) or “naumuthe” cow
is one of the world’s smallest cattle breeds. Originating from Nepal’s Achham
district, this _gai_ (meaning “cow” in Nepali) is called “naumuthe” since it
measures only nine _muthi_ (meaning “a closed fist” in Nepali) from hoof to
hump.

According to the [District Livestock Services
Office](http://www.rufford.org/files/2-01.12.09%20Detailed%20Final%20Report.pdf)
(DLSO) of Achham, a naumuthe cow’s average height is 88 centimeters at the
withers and average weight is 150 kilograms. It normally gives about 1-2
litres of milk daily.

![](https://globalvoices.org/wp-
content/uploads/2017/09/AcchamiCow-489x600.jpg)

An adult naumuthe cow. Image: Sanjib Chaudhary

On the other hand, the bull’s average height is 97 centimeters at the withers
and it weighs around 160 kilograms.

The animal is certainly small, and so is unfortunately its population. As per
recent DLSO records, currently, there are only 447 individuals of this breed
left in the Jalpadevi, Baijnath, Ghughurkot, Mastamandu, Babla, Khaptad,
Budhakot and Devisthan villages of Achham district.

According to research by [Surendra
Wagle,](http://www.rufford.org/rsg/projects/surendra_wagle_0) the Achhami
cattle’s population is falling due to cross breeding, illegal trading to Tibet
for slaughtering, and neglect from local people due to less economic returns
from rearing this breed, among other reasons. However, this breed is more
resistant to foot-and-mouth disease and can survive in diverse environments.

It also produces milk that's “more nutritious than a normal cow's,” if you
were to believe Dev Raj Upadhyay, the principal of Baidyanath Ved Vidhyashram,
a Sanskrit school in [Achham](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Achham_District),
that has been rearing the breed for some time now.

![](https://globalvoices.org/wp-
content/uploads/2017/09/HoardingBoardForAwareness-800x444.jpg)

A hoarding board kept by District Livestock Services Office to raise awareness
about the naumuthe cow. Image: Sanjib Chaudhary

In his
[research](https://www.researchgate.net/publication/259844354_Organic_animal_husbandry_of_Achham_cattle_world%27s_smallest_cattle_breed)
for the second Organic Animal Husbandry Conference in Germany, Devendra Prasad
Bhandari recommended in-situ conservation of the breed, implementation of a
policy to reduce its illegal trade to Tibet, and commercialization of the
breed and its organic products in the international and national market.

And Surendra Wagle proposes conducting awareness workshops with farmers and
providing incentives to groups to rear the naumuthe cow.

Time will tell if the concerned authorities and communities are able to come
together and save this breed before it disappears.

