![US President Barack Obama and Dutch Prime Minister Mark Rutte both favor
"uh" \(or "eh" in Dutch\) over "um." Younger people and women are more likely
to say "um." Credit: PRI's The World/Reuters. Republished with
permission](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2015/02/Obama_Rutte_Um-DRAFT-3-800x471.jpg)

US President Barack Obama and Dutch Prime Minister Mark Rutte both favor “uh”
(or “eh” in Dutch) over “um.” Younger people and women are more likely to say
“um.” Credit: PRI's The World/Reuters.

_This article and a radio report by[Ari Daniel](http://www.pri.org/people/ari-
daniel) for [The World in Words](http://www.pri.org/programs/world-words)
originally [appeared on PRI.org](http://www.pri.org/stories/2015-02-05/across-
several-languages-people-are-opting-um-over-uh) on February 5, 2015 and is
republished as part of a content-sharing agreement._

According to experts, “uh” and “um” are somewhat different beasts. “It does
seem to be the case that ‘um’ generally signals a longer or more important
pause than ‘uh,'” says Mark Liberman, a linguist at the University of
Pennsylvania. At least that's what he thought.

Liberman has been studying these so-called “filled pauses” for [almost a
decade](http://itre.cis.upenn.edu/~myl/languagelog/archives/002629.html), and
he has made a rather curious discovery.

“As Americans get older, they use ‘uh’ more,” he says. “And at every age, men
use ‘uh’ more than women.”

If you look at “um,” exactly the opposite is true. Younger people say “um”
more often than older people. And no matter the age, women say “um” more than
men. Nobody, not even the linguists, were expecting this result; until they
studied these hesitations, they thought it was more about the amount of time a
speaker hesitates than who that speaker is.

Then, late last summer, Liberman attended a conference in Groningen in the
Netherlands. During a coffee break, Liberman was chatting with a small group
of researchers. He brought up his finding about the age and gender differences
related to “um” and “uh,” which prompted the group to look for that pattern
[outside of American English](http://languagelog.ldc.upenn.edu/nll/?p=16414).
They scanned British and Scottish English, German, Danish, Dutch and
Norwegian.

The result, says University of Groningen linguist Martijn Wieling, is that,
“in all cases, we find the same thing.” Just like the Americans that Mark
Liberman analyzed, women and younger people and younger people said “um” more
than “uh.”

Wieling's conclusion is that we are witnessing a language change in progress,
“and that women and younger people are leading the change.”

##### **The future of “um”**

This pattern of women and young people leading us forward is typical of most
language changes. But _why_ is “um” our future, across at least two continents
and five Germanic languages? It's still a puzzle.

![Josef Fruehwald's research suggests that the use of 'um' is preferred among
females and young people. Credit: Josef Fruehwald/University of Edinburgh.
Republished with permission.](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2015/02/um_graph-800x500.jpg)

Josef Fruehwald's research suggests that the use of ‘um’ is preferred among
females and young people. Credit: Josef Fruehwald/University of Edinburgh.

Josef Fruehwald, a sociolinguist at the University of Edinburgh, agrees that
“um” and “uh” may be used slightly differently. But as far as he is concerned,
they are pretty much equivalent.

“When you have two options, you can start using one more frequently and maybe
replace the other one so that it’s no longer an option,” he says. “So why
‘um?’ It’s just one of these things. There’s always a little bit of randomness
to the whole situation.”

By random, he means that we do not know why changes in usage like this happen,
or when the next one will be. Fruehwald admits linguists are terrible at
predicting the future — worse than meteorologists! Language, he says, is even
more chaotic than the weather.

As for how such a linguistic trend might have jumped from one language to
another, Fruehwald says “there are some documented cases of that kind of thing
happening, usually where people can speak both languages and borrow features
of one into the other.”

English is the most likely to be influencing the other languages, but we still
don't know whether that's actually what's happening with “um.” More research
and more linguists are needed.

And as for the future, “um” and “uh” may yo-yo back and forth in terms of
their popularity. Or we may well be watching the extinction of “uh” from our
lexicon.

So would Fruehwald miss “uh?”. “I don’t have a really strong emotional
connection to either of these,” he admits. “Although based on my age
demographics, I’m likely a high ‘um’ user. So maybe that’s where I should
throw my loyalties.”

_The World in Words podcast is
on[Facebook](https://www.facebook.com/pages/The-World-in-
Words/113141975417106) and [iTunes](https://itunes.apple.com/podcast/pris-
world-world-in-words/id279833390?mt=2)._

_Patrick Cox adds: Also in this podcast episode, a conversation with Michael
Erard, editor of[Schwa Fire](https://schwa-fire.com/) and author of
“[Um…:Slips, Stumbles and Verbal Blunders, and What They
Mean.”](http://www.amazon.com/Um-Slips-Stumbles-Verbal-
Blunders/dp/1400095433)_

![Credit: David Conrad. Republished with
permission.](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2015/02/Umgraphic1.jpg)

Credit: David Conrad.

