In July, a group of Moroccan students launched a [Facebook
page](https://www.facebook.com/uecse) called “The Union of Moroccan Students
to Change the Education System” (French acronym: UECSE). The group is a
gathering of young Moroccans whose aim is to “act, and discuss concrete
solutions to improve the education system”.

In less than a month, the Facebook page attracted well over 10,000 members and
a lot of support on social media.

The momentum seems to have been fueled by
[news](http://www.magharebia.com/cocoon/awi/xhtml1/en_GB/features/awi/features/2012/08/05/feature-01)
that the government may be planning to toughen the tuition policy at public
universities.

The group [called](http://uecse.org/2012/08/05/sit-in-du-6-aout-dans-tout-le-
maroc/) [Fr] for a nationwide demonstration on Monday, August 6, 2012, to
“encourage civil society and the Moroccan political elite to open a national
debate on measures to reform the system.”

The appeal was relayed on social media.

In a video, the group posted on YouTube prior to the protest, students called
for radical changes in the education system. “The entire education system
needs to be changed,” one student says on camera. “The system needs to be
broken down completely and rebuilt from scratch,” says another. A lot of
students appearing on the video also denounce what they consider “disincentive
measures” imposed by prestigious _Grandes Ecoles_ , in particular high
thresholds required to compete in college entrance exams.

On the day of the protest, hundreds of students and their parents responded to
the call as documented by pictures and videos posted and shared on the
internet.

The following video is from a demonstration in Morocco's largest city,
Casablanca (posted by
[_The7Gladiator_](http://www.youtube.com/user/The7Gladiator?feature=watch)):

Pictures posted on Flickr by [Hassan
Ouazzani](http://www.flickr.com/photos/ouassane/) show a great diversity of
slogans denouncing corruption, favoritism, poor infrastructure and tough
conditions imposed on undergraduates to enter higher education:

![](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2012/08/7727642832_117ecfa156_b-e1344613406761.jpg)

Moroccan students call for a reform of the education system – Picture by
Hassan Ouazzani – Used with permission

![](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2012/08/7727619058_de80c6af50_b-e1344613447198.jpg)

Moroccan students call for a reform of the education system – Photo used with
kindly permission from Hassan Ouazzani

![](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2012/08/7727725848_8091f0afdb_b-e1344613480167.jpg)

Moroccan students call for reform of the education system – Photo used with
kindly permission from Hassan Ouazzani

The demonstrations went on peacefully. The group [pledges
](https://www.facebook.com/uecse)to organize more sit-ins and roundtables
across the country.

On its Tumblr, the UECSE
[writes](http://uecse.tumblr.com/post/29011229330/young-students-are-asking-
for-a-good-education):

> Young STUDENTS are asking for a good education system they are the MOROCCAN
> STUDENTS, tired of the current situation they are willing to change their
> futur(e) and to achieve their dreams, (an) ambitious wave is showing up

