As Chile’s Senate decides whether to join the all but five countries around
the world that allow therapeutic abortion, Chileans are signing on to social
networks _en masse_ to talk straight to politicians about the previously
swept-under-the-rug topic.

Nine months ago, three Chilean politicians from the Senate Health Committee
nudged the taboo topic onto the table. As early as this week, the Senate must
choose whether to allow abortion when a mother’s life is in danger, when there
is an unviable fetus, and in cases of rape.

**Legislative decisions**

Chile, a leader in Latin American modernity, makes headlines for its hearty
economy. At the same time, necklines still run high, divorce was legalized
only in 2004, and traditional family values reign in the 70-percent Catholic
nation. Despite pressure from UN-based lobbyists and its popularity in the
poles, this is the first time therapeutic abortion hit the Senate floor since
it was banned in 1989 at the tail end of Augosto Pinochet’s dictatorship.
Chile, Nicaragua, El Salvador, Malta and Vatican City stand as the last places
without legalized therapeutic abortion.

The Senate will be deciding on all three pieces of the legislation as soon as
Senate President Guido Girardi puts the legislation up for vote. In Chile, the
issue has overwhelming popularity in the poles: [ 94 percent of
Chileans](http://www.flacso.cl/home/) believe it’s time for a legislation
revision.

Karen Espindola lost her two and a half year old, Oswald, in July. A severe
brain defect plagued him since the day he was born. She employs
[Twitter](http://twitter.com/#!/KEspindola) [es],
[Blogspot](http://osvaldomiangel.blogspot.com/) [es] and traditional media
outlets to spread the word about his painful life story. She blogs to convince
legislators to support therapeutic abortion. One [opinion
piece](http://www.elmostrador.cl/noticias/pais/2011/09/07/el-aborto-y-
las-10-falacias-del-mundo-conservador/) [es] she wrote has been shared on
Twitter 792 times and 2121 times on Facebook.

Under @KEspindola, she recently
[tweeted](http://twitter.com/#!/KEspindola/status/116162074010320896):

> Hoy amaneci echandote de menos a veces no soporto esto,que hacer cuando un
> hijo se te va despues de una vida corta y llena de sufrimiento?

Today, I woke up missing you. Sometimes I can’t stand this. What can you do
when a child passes away after a short life full of suffering?

How to resolve the weighty question is now driving a wedge between the center-
right National Renewal party (RN). President Sebastián Piñera, a member of RN,
vowed to veto any abortion legislation that passes through congress. The
already unpopular president’s approval ratings tanked to a 25-year record low
of 22 percent according to a poll from the Center for the Study of
Contemporary Reality (CERC).

Those against legalizing therapeutic abortion often argue that it would create
a slippery slope toward legalizing all abortion. If any form of abortion is
legalized, pro-choice advocates could point to a precedent. While many pro-
life groups distinguish between therapeutic abortion from abortion in general,
[accionfamilia.org](http://accionfamilia.org/) [es], a pro-life blog, believes
that the therapeutic abortion legislation veils what actually, “deserves the
name of ‘abortion with the pretext of being therapeutic.’”

**Online opinions**

Piñera fell out with the bloggers behind [Chile Liberal: speaking truth to
power](http://chileliberal.blogspot.com/2011/09/aborto-terapeutico-pinera-no-
puede-ni.html) [es], when he strayed from socially liberal campaign promises
regarding abortion and gay marriage according to the blog. They asked the
president to reconsider his bar-nun decision to veto. The blog
[reads](http://chileliberal.blogspot.com/2011/09/aborto-terapeutico-pinera-no-
puede-ni.html) [es]:

> Presidente: deje que prospere el debate en el Congreso y absténgase de
> emplear el veto, por mucho que lo amenacen nuevamente. …. Póngase firme con
> el aborto terapéutico, deje en claro que es la decisión de una instancia
> legítima, como lo es el Congreso Nacional.

President: Let the debate in Congress thrive and don’t employ a veto, even if
you’re being pressured to do it… Put your signature on the therapeutic
abortion legislation, let it be clear that it is legitimate, since it is from
our National Congress.

Espindola
[tweeted](http://twitter.com/#!/KEspindola/status/112931983407071232) [es]:

> Tengo mucha rabia el presidente defendera la vida hasta su muerte natural y
> el sufrimiento de un hijo con una malfor cerebral severa q hacen.

I’m furious that a president, who defends life until a natural death, allows
the suffering of a child with a severe brain defect to do it.

Karla Rubilar, an RN deputy, shares the president’s political party, but has a
different opinion on the issue. She said she will vote in favor of therapeutic
abortion.

Rubilar’s[ Twitter ](http://twitter.com/#%21/karlarubilar) account boasts a
stampede of almost 20 thousand followers, considering that she represents only
a slice of constituents from Chile’s capital city. She called Twitter “a great
system. It’s a revolution in how we do politics. It’s practically
instantaneous and checks the pulse of the how citizens feel.”

Rubilar told Mi Voz that one young man’s tweet actually jumped from the
virtual world into a real political discussion. The less-than-140 characters
opened her eyes to the importance of providing palliative care for fetuses
with severe brain defects. Rubilar brought this to the health minister and
representatives from other political parties. New legislation to help mothers
pay for palliative care is now underway.

Chileans spend an average of 8.7 hours a month on social networking sites,
compared to the 5.4-hour worldwide average according to a [comScore, Inc
](http://www.comscore.com/) survey. Facebook corralled its third highest
percentage of users from Chile. Chilean tweets and blog posts aren’t wandering
aimlessly through cyber space. Politicians are paying close attention; This
month [Piñera met with 15 of Chile’s “most influential” Twitter
users](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2011/09/05/chile-influential-twitter-
users-have-lunch-with-the-president/). Citizens are tweeting out.

[Katie Manning](https://globalvoicesonline.org/author/katie-manning/) wrote
this post as part of [our partnership with Mi
Voz](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2011/08/22/chile-new-partnership-between-
global-voices-and-mi-voz/).

