In my last article, “[Lessons from the Free Kareem
campaign](https://www.globalvoicesonline.org/2007/04/04/lessons-from-the-free-
kareem-campaign/)”, I talked about campaigning and why some jailed and
persecuted bloggers and online writers are winning sympathy, while others have
difficulty attracting the attention of the public. I also discussed the logic
behind the success or the failure of campaigning, and made a comparison with
the Tunisian cyber-activism case.

In this post I would like to draw attention to a list — which makes no
pretensions to completeness — of under-covered advocacy campaigns and point to
specific cases of bloggers, online writers and activists whose causes are
worth supporting. A few of them have been in prison for years, and a few
others are being sued or harassed because of what they are writing online. Not
all of them are bloggers, and I personally do not believe that blogging
communities should reserve their support and activism for persecuted bloggers
and abandon other online writers who suffer harassment and torture. They all
deserve our support to protect their basic human rights. One hopes that we can
learn from other people's experiences in order to spread the word and raise
awareness among blogspheres whose support is crucial in putting an end to a
silence that ought not to be allowed to continue.

Blogging about the need for [a “better solidarity-based
blogosphere”](http://astrubal.nawaat.org/2007/03/29/mistral-video-advocacy/),
and commenting on the
[video](http://video.google.com/videoplay?docid=-7469301386093238675&hl=en)
made by [Mistral](http://www.nawaat.org/portail/rubrique.php3?id_auteur=58),
the Tunisian blogger and activist Astrubal said that:

> Many things still can be done to help for the release of those who still
> jailed and certainly much more steps to take to prevent such harms. And
> whatever it can be done, Mistral is so right when he thinks that it can not
> be as efficient as actions done by a much solidarity-based blogosphere.

[  
![kareem-amer.png](https://www.globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2007/04/kareem-amer.png)](http://technorati.com/search/kareem-
amer)

In order to have a clear picture about the disparity in the level of coverage
of the following cases, in comparison with the Kareem case, I've posted a few
Technorati graphs showing the number of blog posts, containing the studied
cases, per day for the last year (please click on the images to see the
results). The graphs illustrate the hard work that needs to be done in order
to unveil certain injustices and ensure equal support for all persecuted
online writers, be they bloggers or not.  

**ABD AL-MONEM MAHMOUD (Egypt)**

[![Abd al-monem](https://www.globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2007/04/abd-al-monem-
mahmoud.png)](http://technorati.com/search/%22Abd+Al-Monem+Mahmoud%22)

