![Images mixed by Tetyana Lokot.](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2015/03/geolocating-presidents-tweets.jpg)

Images mixed by Tetyana Lokot.

_This article is part of a citizen-media data-analysis project, a
collaboration between[RuNet
Echo](https://globalvoicesonline.org/-/special/runet-echo/) and the [Maryland
Institute for Technology in the Humanities](http://mith.umd.edu). Explore the
complete article series on the [All the Presidents’
Tweets](https://globalvoicesonline.org/specialcoverage/all-the-presidents-
tweets/) page._

Our targeted Twitter data sample of over six million tweets contains tweets
[in many languages](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2015/02/19/twitter-
presidents-putin-poroshenko-language/), but those are not always indicative of
where people are tweeting from. While we were predominantly interested in what
Russians and Ukrainians were saying about their presidents, we were also
curious to see where tweets originated. As we collected all the tweets
containing the last names of the presidents of Russia and Ukraine in Russian (
_Путин_ and _Порошенко_ ), Ukrainian ( _Путін_ and _Порошенко_ ), and English
( _Putin_ and _Poroshenko_ ), geolocating them could be useful for observing
where people were talking about them more.

Geolocating tweets can be tricky, as there are several ways Twitter lets users
indicate their location. For one, a user can specify a _Place_ —manually
select a city or neighborhood using a preexisting list of locations from a
Twitter menu. Then there's the _Exact Location_ —a set of coordinates usually
provided via GPS or cellular triangulation. Manual Place selections are
usually made from desktops or other fixed-location devices, so if a user ends
up traveling, the last selected location would still be reflected in the
tweets, making this location method less precise. The geo-coordinates of the
Exact Location though usually use a mobile device's GPS capabilities and are
thus more exact, but this feature is disabled by default in Twitter apps, so
users must change their account settings for it to be enabled.

In their
[study](http://journals.uic.edu/ojs/index.php/fm/article/view/4366/3654) of a
sample of tweets from the Twitter Decahose (10% of all tweets sent globally
each day) from the fall of 2012, Leetaru et al. found that on an average day
only 1.6 percent of tweets had Exact Location enabled. According to
[Semiocast](http://semiocast.com/en/publications/2012_07_30_Twitter_reaches_half_a_billion_accounts_140m_in_the_US),
who looked at a broader sample of tweets in mid-2012, the geo-coordinates
feature was used in roughly 0.77% of all public tweets.

![All Exact Location coordinates in the Twitter Decahose 23 October 2012 to 30
November 2012 \(Leetaru et al., 2013\).](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2015/03/figure4_leetaruetal.jpg)

All Exact Location coordinates in the Twitter Decahose 23 October 2012 to 30
November 2012 (Leetaru et al., 2013).

The image above shows all Exact Location coordinates from Leetaru et al.'s
sample. Because the percentage of geolocated tweets is so negligible, studies
relying only on these tweets will almost surely have a skewed view of the
Twitterverse, especially over short periods of time. However, the map shows
that in terms of geolocated tweets, Twitter exhibits strong geographic
diversity, and most countries on the map have at least some geolocated tweets.
The use of the Exact Location feature is, of course, also tied to mobile
Internet penetration and smartphone use in various countries. All of this
means that as a single source of data, geolocated tweets are not
representative, but as one of many facets providing information about a sample
of the Twitter stream, they can provide some interesting insights.

The number of geolocated tweets in our Poroshenko/Putin dataset was 31013, or
0.49% of 6,342,294 total tweets we collected. This is somewhat smaller then
the percentage of geolocated tweets in the larger samples discussed above, but
still in line with the general trend.

All the geolocated tweets from our targeted sample are represented on the
interactive map below, with a dot for each tweet. The saturation of particular
areas with tweets is color-coded, so areas with more tweets are more red then
yellow, and areas with a few tweets are more yellow than red. You can zoom in
and out on the map to see the location of tweets in a particular geographic
area in more detail by using the “+/-” controls at top left. Clicking on each
dot reveals a pop-up window with an active link to the tweet in question.

From the visualization, it's obvious that North America, Western Europe, and
parts of Eastern Europe have the largest share of the geolocated tweets in our
dataset, and some parts of South America are covered as well. This is fairly
reflective of the overall global geolocated tweets distribution from larger
studies with non-targeted samples, with the exception of Asia, which is
overall more active with geolocated tweets then in our sample.

The [map](http://cdb.io/19ytkqx) also allows you to zoom in on particular
locations by searching for them in the search bar at top right. Here are some
comparisons of geolocated tweet density of some key cities based on our sample
(all magnified to the same level of detail).

![Density of geolocated tweets about Putin and Poroshenko for Moscow \(top\),
Kyiv \(middle\) and New York \(bottom\), from October 12 to November 30, 2014.
](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/moscow-kiev-
newyork.jpg)

Density of geolocated tweets about Putin and Poroshenko for Moscow (top), Kyiv
(middle) and New York (bottom), from October 12 to November 30, 2014.

![Density of geolocated tweets about Putin and Poroshenko for London \(top\),
Paris \(middle\) and Berlin \(bottom\), from October 12 to November 30,
2014.](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/london-paris-
berlin.jpg)

Density of geolocated tweets about Putin and Poroshenko for London (top),
Paris (middle) and Berlin (bottom), from October 12 to November 30, 2014.

The relative density of geolocated tweets in some of the cities above roughly
corresponds to Leetaru et al.'s [ranking of the top 20
cities](http://journals.uic.edu/ojs/index.php/fm/article/view/4366/3654#tab1)
by percent of geotagged tweets in their 2012 sample. In their ranking, New
York City comes second, Paris is fifth, London seventh and Moscow 20th. Given
the theme of our targeted sample, it would be logical to expect more tweets
about Putin and/or Poroshenko from Berlin, since Germany is closely involved
in the Russian/Ukrainian politics at the moment, but Berlin users do not seem
to be in the habit of geotagging their tweets.

Kyiv does not exhibit geolocated tweet density comparable to Moscow, but this
is not surprising given the difference in [population
size](http://www.wolframalpha.com/input/?i=population+of+moscow+and+kiev) and
the difference in [smartphone penetration
rates](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_countries_by_smartphone_penetration)
in Ukraine and Russia. New York has relatively fewer geolocated tweets than
Paris or London, perhaps mirroring both its geographical and its political
distance from the Russian/Ukrainian political affairs.

While not entirely representative of the entire six million tweets, this
smaller geolocated dataset presented as a heat map gives us some sense of how
the world's attention to the two presidents and their politics is distributed.

