![Photo by Kamyar Adl on Flickr. CC BY
2.0.](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-content/uploads/2015/01/presidents-
tweets-intro.jpg)

Photo by Kamyar Adl on Flickr. CC BY 2.0.

_This article is part of a citizen-media data-analysis project, a
collaboration between[RuNet
Echo](https://globalvoicesonline.org/-/special/runet-echo/) and the [Maryland
Institute for Technology in the Humanities](http://mith.umd.edu). Explore the
complete article series on the [All the Presidents’
Tweets](https://globalvoicesonline.org/specialcoverage/all-the-presidents-
tweets/) page._

Both Ukraine and Russia have loomed large on the social-media radar in recent
months, not in the least because of the political and social turmoil caused by
the [Euromaidan
protests](https://globalvoicesonline.org/specialcoverage/2013-special-
coverage/ukraines-euromaiden-protests/) and the ongoing international conflict
in Crimea and Eastern Ukraine.

Amid the political, military, and information struggles, Internet users often
resort to discussing public figures, officials, and politicians as
representing the best and worst of their countries, and none have been as
central to recent events as the leaders of the two states.

RuNet Echo decided to investigate how Russian and Ukrainian Twitter users talk
about their presidents—Vladimir Putin and Petro Poroshenko. Which one do they
talk about more? What do they say and in what context? What images and
multimedia do users associate with these prominent politicians? To find
answers to these and some other questions, we've been collecting tweets since
October 2014, and now have a corpus of over six million tweets mentioning
Putin or Poroshenko in English, Russian, and Ukrainian. Only a fraction of
this huge data set represents tweets posted by Russians and Ukrainians, of
course, but that still means we have thousands upon thousands of data points
that can reveal insights about the public discourse around these two men.

![Tweets About Putin And PoroshenkoThe number of captured tweets per hour with
keywords poroshenko, putin, порошенко, путин and путін over a period from
October 12 to November 30, 2014. Color shows details about each keyword. Hover
over a point on one of t
](https://publicrevizit.tableausoftware.com/static/images/GS/GS85ZMSG7/1_rss.png)

[Learn About Tableau](http://www.tableausoftware.com/public/about-tableau-
products?ref=https://public.tableausoftware.com/shared/GS85ZMSG7)

Over the next few months, we'll be publishing the results of our analysis and
telling you the stories that emerge from the Twitter data. Stay tuned for
engaging infographics, unexpected discoveries, and fun multimedia collections,
all based on what Russian and Ukrainian Twitter has been saying about the two
presidents.

