![Images mixed by Tetyana Lokot.](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2015/02/twitter-presidents-language.jpg)

Images mixed by Tetyana Lokot.

_This article is part of a citizen-media data-analysis project, a
collaboration between[RuNet
Echo](https://globalvoicesonline.org/-/special/runet-echo/) and the [Maryland
Institute for Technology in the Humanities](http://mith.umd.edu). Explore the
complete article series on the [All the Presidents’
Tweets](https://globalvoicesonline.org/specialcoverage/all-the-presidents-
tweets/) page._

When we started collecting our Twitter data last October, we were
predominantly interested in what Russians and Ukrainians were saying about
their presidents. But we decided to cast a wider net and collected all the
tweets containing the last names of the heads of states in Russian ( _Путин_
and _Порошенко_ ), Ukrainian ( _Путін_ and _Порошенко_ ), and English (
_Putin_ and _Poroshenko_ ). We ended up with over six million
tweets—6,342,294, to be exact.

Once we had our data, we faced a problem: how can we tell when a Russian or
Ukrainian tweets about Putin or Poroshenko as opposed to a Brit or a Korean?
There are several attributes of tweets and Twitter accounts that help indicate
a user's country and language. First, there is _the location a user chooses to
add to their profile_. Then there is _the language a user sets for their
account and interface_. Third, _each tweet also has a language indicator_ ,
determined from the keyboard setting and tweet content. Finally, some users
choose to turn on geolocation on their smartphones, and in this case _each
tweet also gets a set of coordinates_ that can be put on a map.

None of these options tells you what the user's nationality is with 100%
certainty, of course, but each of them gives us some useful information. So in
this installment, we'll look at the language use in the tweets contained in
our data set, and will leave geolocated tweets and further discussion of
country-specific tweeting until next time.

Here's the breakdown of our six-million strong tweet archive.

![Tweets by Language
](https://public.tableau.com/static/images/Pu/PutinandPoroshenkoTweetsbyLanguage/TweetsbyLanguage/1_rss.png)

It is immediately obvious that tweets in Russian dominate the space,
accounting for over half of all tweets in the dataset. But Twitter users
posting in Russian include not just Russians, but also Ukrainians, Kazakhs,
Moldovans, and citizens of other post-Soviet states. Russian-speaking
immigrants anywhere from Italy to Australia also contribute to the massive
presence of the language in our data set.

Although Russian holds the top spot, lots of Ukrainians tweet in Russian and
Ukrainian intermittently, so there is no real correlation between the number
of tweets in Russian and Ukrainian and the number of Twitter users in Russia
([over eight million in
2014](http://habrahabr.ru/company/palitrumlab/blog/248645/)) and in Ukraine
([about 600,000 as of July 2014](http://www.digitaleastfactor.com/yandex-
report-twitter-usage-ukraine/)).

Additionally, we know both Russians and Ukrainians often tweet in non-native
languages, e.g., English and French. This is especially evident during times
of political upheaval, and is consistent with tweeting behavior that Poell and
Darmoni observed in their [2012 study of the Tunisian
revolution](http://dare.uva.nl/document/493316), where people tweeted in
English to engage the Western mainstream media and English-speaking users.

The use of both Latin and non-Latin hashtags in the same tweet is another
factor complicating language analysis. In her [analysis of millions of
tweets](https://medium.com/what-about/when-are-tweets-about-ukraine-in-
ukrainian-55ff8517a33b) during the Euromaidan protests in Ukraine, Katerena
Kuksenok observed a “large number of tweets using equivalent hashtags in
multiple languages” (eg, “#Євромайдан #Евромайдан #Euromaidan”), ostensibly to
maximize exposure of the tweets’ messages.

While Russian and Ukrainian at the top of our language pyramid are easy to
explain, some other languages at the top are less obvious, especially if we
compare the results from our sample with the broader statistics on Twitter's
most used languages.

![Dashboard 1
](https://public.tableau.com/static/images/To/Top10TwitterLanguages/Dashboard1/1_rss.png)

The popularity of English is evident, since Anglophone users come not only
from English-speaking countries like the US and the UK, but from countries all
over the world. Spanish is popular across Twitter in general, and that seems
to be reflected in our sample as well.

However, French is less popular overall, and German even less so, and yet they
have a fairly significant presence in our sample. This might be because both
France and Germany are intimately involved in the negotiations between Ukraine
and Russia around the conflict in Eastern Ukraine, so the media and social
network denizens of both countries are paying more than average attention to
the affairs of Poroshenko and Putin.

The same seems to be true of Turkish and Italian Twitter users, as the number
of Turkish-language tweets mentioning the two presidents is almost equal to
the number of tweets in German, and the Italian is not far behind, indicating
heightened attention to the fate of their neighbors.

A notable absence is the relatively small number of tweets in Japanese in our
sample, given that a massive 16% of overall Twitter content is produced in
Japanese. Arabic, Malay and Portuguese also constitute a negligent percentage
of tweets about the Russian and Ukrainian presidents, whereas Indonesian-
speaking Twitter users appear to be more interested in the matter.

While the world at large is obviously interested in what the leaders of
Ukraine and Russia are doing, an overwhelming amount of interest and opinions
seems to be concentrated in the Russian-speaking Twitter sphere and its
Ukrainian counterpart. As we dig deeper into this particular domain, we expect
to bring you new insights about political debate and discussion on the RuNet,
and a more nuanced understanding of what the personas of Vladimir Putin and
Petro Poroshenko mean to Twitter users in Ukraine and Russia.

