This is the second part of our retrospection of some of the major events,
which took place in 2009 in the South Asian countries, seen through the eyes
of the citizen journalists. If you have missed, here is [the first
part](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2009/12/31/south-asia-looking-back-
at-2009/).

### Maldives:

[![Male, the capital of Maldives. Image by Flickr user mode, and used under a
creative commons license ](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2009/03/male-640x480.jpg)](http://www.flickr.com/photos/mashafeeg/397839215/)

Male, the capital of Maldives. Image by Flickr user mode, and used under a
creative commons license

Several dissident and alleged anti-Islamic websites [were filtered in
Maldives](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2009/03/18/maldives/) in the first
quarter of year 2009 and that raised a debate in the blogosphere questioning
the political motives behind the ban. Bloggers commented that through the
blocking of websites the authorities were [hampering freedom of
speech](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2009/03/23/maldives-free-speech-under-
threat/) and were turning “the internet into an intranet”.

It was a tough year for journalists too in Maldives as some of them were
physically abused or threatened for their work as [reported by some
blogs](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2009/07/26/maldives-journalists-at-
risk/).

This year the [first free parliamentary election of
Maldives](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2009/05/20/maldives-first-free-
parliamentary-election/) took place. In May more than 400 candidates contested
for 77 seats in the parliament.

Maldives is in the forefront of the affect of climate change. Several
organizations in Maldives had [geared up for the climate change conference in
Copenhagen](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2009/10/11/maldives-gearing-up-for-
copenhagen/).

### Nepal:

[![Maoist protest In Nepal](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2010/01/maoist-
protest-640x4801.jpg)](http://www.flickr.com/photos/ingmar/3524731831/)

Maoist protest In Nepal. Image by Flickr user izahorsky, used under a creative
commons licence

It has been a turbulent year for the Himalayan nation. 2009 can be named as
the [year of protests in
Nepal](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2009/03/16/protests-galore-in-nepal/):
whether its the political parties or the minority groups, their means of
demand or protest were occupying the streets and shutting down businesses and
offices.

In April there was a rumor that some Generals of Nepal Army was planning for a
’soft coup d'état’ to tackle Maoist leader and prime Minister Prachanda's plan
to dismiss the Chief of the Army Staff General Rookmangud Katwal. The bloggers
[weighed in on the rift between the two
quarters](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2009/04/24/nepal-a-failed-coup/).
This conflict was aggravated and [Prime Minister Prachanda
resigned](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2009/05/04/nepal-prime-minister-
prachanda-resigns/) when President Ram Baran Yadav reinstated the sacked army
chief Rookmangud Katwal. This had put Nepal into political uncertainty as to
who would lead them in the future. The Maoists had announced new round of
protest against the President.

[![Prime Minister Madhav Kumar Nepal, Image by Utudanuki,
Wikipedia](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2009/06/madhav_kumar_nepal.jpg)](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Madhav_Kumar_Nepal)

Prime Minister Madhav Kumar Nepal, Image by Utudanuki, Wikipedia

[Nepal had a fresh start](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2009/06/01/nepal-a-
fresh-start/) with the new Prime Minister Madhab Kumar Nepal, veteran
Communist leader and former general secretary of Nepal communist party (United
Marxist and Leninist). However Working with the Maoists seemed to be an uphill
task for prime minister Nepal.

At the end of the year there was still no good news from Nepal politics as
[the peace process between the Maoists and the government was
faltering](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2009/11/24/nepals-peace-process-
faltering/). Nepal slipped further down on the Transparency International's
(TI) anti-corruption scale and corruption spread beyond the government and
politicians into the social life [impeding development in
Nepal](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2009/12/09/corruption-impeding-
development-in-nepal/).

On the brighter side there were some achievements like the [successful bio gas
revolution in Nepal](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2009/10/15/nepal-bio-gas-
revolution/).

### Pakistan:

In March 2009 Pakistani Lawyers and political activists arranged a Long March
and sit in protest demanding to reinstate the deposed judges. Citizen
journalists [covered the event
live](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2009/03/11/pakistan-live-coverage-of-the-
long-march/). Democracy won as the government bowed down to the people
pressure and reinstated The Chief Justice of Pakistan Iftikhar Mohammed
Chaudhry. The victory [raised the question what is next for
Pakistan](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2009/03/16/pakistan-triumph-of-
democracy/).

Pakistani govt.'s truce deal with the Taliban earlier this year [ raised much
debate in Pakistan](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2009/02/19/pakistan-the-
taliban-truce-deal/). Some bloggers thought that the peace deal has come with
enormous costs and abandoned the people of Swat valley region to the Taliban
warriors and hinted that this will not spell an end to the violence in Swat.

They were right as the Taliban offensives escalated in extreme nature. After
the [attack on Sri Lanka Cricket
team](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2009/03/03/pakistan-terror-hits-
cricket/), Lahore came into limelight again when a [Police training camp in
the suburbs of Lahore was attacked by heavily armed
terrorists](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2009/03/30/pakistan-lahore-police-
academy-attack/) killing many.

[![Swat refugees, Image courtesy Dr. Awab Alvi
\(teeth.com.pk/blog\)](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2009/07/unswat2.jpg)](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2009/07/unswat2.jpg)

Swat refugees, Image courtesy Dr. Awab Alvi (teeth.com.pk/blog)

The Pakistan army [started to fight back against the
Taliban](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2009/05/10/pakistan-fighting-the-
taliban/) and Pakistan plunged into a civil war like situation. And the
country was hit by a [severe humanitarian
crisis](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2009/05/21/pakistan-a-humanitarian-
crisis/) with a staggering number of internally displaced people as a result
of the military onslaught against the Taliban insurgency. After some months
the Pakistani government arranged their repatriation and the [handling of the
process raised much
debate](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2009/07/31/pakistan-return-of-
refugees/).

The whole exercise of displacement and return was a [horrible tragedy in the
history of Pakistan](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2009/09/15/pakistan-back-
home-and-starting-a-new-life/ ). However this saga did not end. [Pakistan
army's operations in South
Waziristan](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2009/11/02/pakistan-operation-in-
south-waziristan/) against the Taliban led to [mass exodus of
people](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2009/11/04/pakistan-south-waziristan-a-
different-exodus/) for safety.

Meanwhile the Taliban mayhem continued as numerous suicidal terrorist attacks
were carried out in
[Peshawar](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2009/06/11/pakistan-mayhem-in-
peshawar/), [Rawalpindi](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2009/12/04/pakistan-
bomb-attack-in-rawalpindi/), [Karachi
](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2009/12/29/pakistan-pictures-of-bomb-blast-
in-karachi/) and elsewhere in the country. Bloggers elaborated the resentment
of Pakistanis [who were rallying against these Taliban
offensives](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2009/06/24/pakistan-rallying-
against-the-taliban/).

There were some respite as [the news of the death of the Taliban leader
Baitullah Masud]( https://globalvoicesonline.org/2009/08/08/pakistan-
baitullah-mehsud-possibly-killed/) emerged. However Talibans continued with
their wanton killings. Pakistan was also troubled with sectarian riots in
[Gojra](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2009/08/04/pakistan-condemning-gojra-
riots/) and [Karachi](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2009/12/30/pakistan-
arson-attack-after-bombing/).

[![Go Green Campaign via Twitter](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2009/08/go-green.jpg)](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2009/08/go-green.jpg)

Go Green Campaign via Twitter

The citizen journalists of Pakistan were active in 2009 trying to take back
the country from the impacts of terrorism and deterioration of law and order.
Notable online campaigns included ‘[go green
campaign](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2009/08/04/pakistan-go-green-
movement/)‘ and ‘[take back the tech
campaign](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2009/11/27/pakistan-take-back-the-
tech-campaign/)‘.

Pakistan also had a [step forward towards the right
direction](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2009/08/12/pakistan-a-step-in-the-
right-direction/) as the country’s National Assembly passed a bill to outlaw
domestic violence.

### Sri Lanka:

For the people of Sri Lanka, 2009 marked a bloody and bitter end to the war
with LTTE. And the win, albeit controversial, brought hope to the nation which
suffered for long.

[![Funeral Procession for Lasantha Wickramatunga, Photo by Indi.ca, used under
a Creative Commons
License](http://farm4.static.flickr.com/3417/3191745908_563611cd50.jpg?v=0)](http://www.flickr.com/photos/indi/3191745908/in/set-72157612432451945/)

Funeral Procession for Lasantha Wickramatunga, Photo by Indi.ca, used under a
Creative Commons License

The repression of pro LTTE voices continued as [the studios of Sirasa TV, a
major broadcast network in Sri Lanka was
attacked](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2009/01/06/sri-lanka-attack-on-
sirasa-tv/) and an outspoken critic of government Lasantha Wickrematunge,
(editor of the Sunday Leader) [was
murdered](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2009/01/13/sri-lanka-slain-
journalist/).

In January The president of Sri Lanka Mahinda Rajapakshe officially announced
that [the government troops have captured LTTE rebel's de facto headquarters
Kilinochchi](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2009/01/02/sri-lanka-mission-
accomplished/) after suffering heavy loss in the battle. But commentators said
that “the real victory would come when LTTE loses the support of the Tamil
people and the Sri Lankan Tamil diaspora”.

The Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam (LTTE) were holding on to a small portion
of land in the north of Sri Lanka, but a lot of innocent civilians were still
trapped in the war zone. the ‘international community’ and the international
media [were confused by the propaganda and counter allegations by both the
parties](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2009/04/24/sri-lanka-2/). So they
could not do much for the trapped civilians.

The war virtually ended when the [LTTE leader Vellupillai Prabhakaran was
defeated and killed](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2009/05/18/sri-lanka-
bloggers-react-to-the-death-of-the-ltte-leader/). Many [conspiracy theories
emerged]( https://globalvoicesonline.org/2009/05/22/sri-lanka-abuse-disbelief-
and-bitterness-persist/) making Prabhakaran's death controversial and some
also resorted to Photoshop to prove that he is still alive.

[![IDP Camps in Sri Lanka, Image by Foreign and Commonwealth Office, used
under a Creative Commons License](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2009/06/idp-sri-
lanka.jpg)](http://www.flickr.com/photos/foreignoffice/3485359751/)

IDP Camps in Sri Lanka, Image by Foreign and Commonwealth Office, used under a
Creative Commons License

The end of war brought peace in Sri Lanka and the overwhelming sentiment in
the country was relief, and hope. However sense of [disbelief and
worry](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2009/06/04/sri-lanka-a-suppressed-
nation/) was still present among many Sri Lankan Tamils especially the Sri
Lankan Tamil diaspora because of reports that from more than 300,000 IDPs
‘13,000 people were missing from their camps in Sri Lanka‘. These kinds of
[reports](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2009/07/20/sri-lanka-deaths-in-idp-
camps/) were criticized by some of the bloggers. On the other hand reports
said that [anonymous blog entries were the only source of information from IDP
camps](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2009/08/15/sri-lanka-blogs-only-source-
of-information-from-idp-camps/).

In November the blogosphere [came alive with the
news](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2009/11/12/sri-lanka-the-general-
resigns/) that General Fonseka, former military chief who spearheaded the
total annihilation of the Liberation Tigers of Tamil Ealam (LTTE), had
resigned and a newly formed opposition alliance nominated him as their
candidate for the next presidential election in Sri Lanka.

I hope you have enjoyed our South Asia coverage and in 2010 we look forward to
provide you with more insights of citizen journalists into the lives of the
people of this region and the issues that affect them. If you are interested
to contribute as a bridge blogger of your respective countries, please contact
us.

