The year 2009 is ending and its time to retrospect how the year has been for
the South Asian region. In a two-part review we will look back at some of the
major events which took place this year in the South Asian countries seen
through the eyes of the citizen journalists. Special thanks to the South Asia
authors of Global Voices for their insight and hard work all around the year.

The year was tough for South Asia as the global recession affected people of
this region too. The populous region is a source of many migrant workers in
the middle east and other places in the world. We saw [many migrant workers
returning to their homeland](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2009/03/19/south-
asia-migrant-workers/) as they lost their jobs and saw opportunities
diminishing. Energy was a major concern as [some countries had to cope with
power shortage and rolling
blackouts](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2009/04/26/south-asia-coping-with-
the-heat/).

### Bangladesh

[![](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2009/02/purnomuthi.jpg)](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2009/02/purnomuthi.jpg)Although the history of Bangla blogging
is relatively short, the bloggers could achieve a milestone. This year about
[50 books had been published by
bloggers](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2009/02/13/bangladesh-books/)
targeting the [Ekushey Book
Fair](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ekushey_Book_Fair) in February. We also had
an interesting post where [we looked at Bangladesh through the eyes of the
expatriate bloggers](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2009/07/12/bangladesh-
through-the-eyes-of-expatriates/).

On February 25th morning the news broke that a mutiny was in progress inside
Bangladesh Rifles (BDR – paramilitary border security force) head office.
Amidst rumors and media attentions [citizen journalists jumped in to cover the
developments](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2009/02/25/bangladesh-citizen-
journalists-covering-bdr-mutiny/) and provided important perspectives.

[![Ack Ack Gun on Satmasjid, Road 7A. Copyright Drishtipat and used with
permission ](http://unheardvoice.net/blog/wp-
content/uploads/2009/02/ackackgun_satmasjid1.jpg)](http://unheardvoice.net/)

Ack Ack Gun on Satmasjid, Road 7A. Copyright Drishtipat and used with
permission

The mutiny ended tragically as it left as many as 148 people dead or missing
including many army officers, [which left many questions
unanswered](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2009/02/27/bangladesh-mutiny-is-
over-but-question-remains/). In March YouTube and File Sharing Sites were
[briefly Blocked in
Bangladesh](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2009/03/08/bangladesh-youtube-and-
file-sharing-sites-blocked/) in an attempt to block a leaked tape containing
the audio clip of the meeting of the Prime minister and the aggrieved army
officers who were protesting the massacre of army officers during the BDR
mutiny.

[![](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2009/05/abid_jaljala_map.jpg)](http://www.somewhereinblog.net/blog/Abid_Jaljala/28950257)Bangladeshi
and Indian Netizens took to the task of [analyzing the adverse impact on the
nature](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2009/05/27/bangladesh-india-no-to-
tipaimukh-dam/ ) by the proposed Tipaimukh Hydroelectric Project in India
(near Bangladesh border) and the miseries it will bring to the local people.
Online campaigns were launched to protest the construction of the dam.
Bloggers [questioned the transparency of the process of
negotiation](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2009/07/30/bangladesh-india-
tipaimukh-dam-and-transparency/) between the two governments regarding
Tipaimukh and discussed about hidden agendas.

In November pressure from Chinese embassy prompted the local authorities [to
close down a photo exhibition on Tibet in
Dhaka](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2009/11/01/bangladesh-chinese-pressure-
censors-tibet-exhibition-in-dhaka/).

### Bhutan

What is Bhutan? One camp glorifies Bhutan as something close to heaven and the
other claims that it is practicing ethnic cleansing by driving out Nepali
Lhotsampa minorities. Our new Bhutanese author _Sonam Ongmo_ [highlights
Bhutanese citizen media](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2009/11/17/bhutan-
shangri-la-or-ethnic-cleanser/) to find out the truth.

[![Landscape of Bhutan. Image by Flickr user Jmhullot, used under a creative
commons license](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2009/11/Bhutan.jpg)](http://www.flickr.com/photos/jmhullot/2262929973/)

Landscape of Bhutan. Image by Flickr user Jmhullot, used under a creative
commons license

The Gross National Happiness (GNH) concept was originally coined in Bhutan in
1972. However, Bhutanese bloggers share their views on [how the concept seems
to be taken more seriously in places other than Bhutan](
https://globalvoicesonline.org/2009/12/02/gross-national-happiness-bring-it-
home-to-roost/).

### India

**Election:**

This year marked the 15th Lok Sabha (parliament) Elections in India and
citizen journalists were up to the task since the start of the political
campaign. More interestingly major political parties used different online
campaigns for the first time and bloggers reacted to these campaigns
([BJP](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2009/03/27/india-elections-09-netizens-
react-to-political-campaigns/),
[INC](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2009/04/16/india-
elections-%E2%80%9809-netizens-react-to-political-campaigns-ii/)).

[![screenshot of a Congress ad showing on Bollywood Frames, an entertainment
blog.](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2009/04/congressadsonline-300x204.jpg)](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2009/04/congressadsonline-300x204.jpg)

screenshot of a Congress ad showing on Bollywood Frames, an entertainment
blog.

It was indeed India's [first digital
election](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2009/03/22/indias-first-digital-
elections/). Global Voices [special coverage on India's
elections](https://globalvoicesonline.org/specialcoverage/indian-
elections-2009/) dissected the campaigns in multiple angles, like [the
analysis of the impact of socially conscious corporate
campaigns](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2009/03/31/india-2/) and how civil
society groups in India used [digital tools to run voter registration and
transparency campaigns in the run up to the
elections](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2009/03/28/digital-civil-society-
campaigns-in-the-2009-indian-general-elections/).

[![](http://farm4.static.flickr.com/3452/3400443177_2dd2bba65d.jpg?v=0)](http://farm4.static.flickr.com/3452/3400443177_2dd2bba65d.jpg?v=0)

Bloggers weighed in with [their predictions and analysis of opinion
polls](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2009/04/12/predictions-polls-india-
elections/) and how celebrity power [impacted the
elections](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2009/04/14/celebrity-power-in-
indian-elections/). They have also [investigated the black money trails of the
politicians](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2009/04/27/indian-elections-09-on-
the-black-money-trail/).

[![](http://farm4.static.flickr.com/3554/3392637641_c695cfa83c.jpg?v=0)](http://farm4.static.flickr.com/3554/3392637641_c695cfa83c.jpg?v=0)

This time around we saw the the advent of [citizen-driven election monitoring
– Vote report](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2009/04/08/india-the-advent-of-
citizen-driven-election-monitoring/) based on Ushahidi engine and a plethora
of [online election resources](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2009/04/13/the-
best-online-sources-for-news-and-analysis-on-the-2009-indian-lok-sabha-
elections/).

[![](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2009/04/vote_report_india_header.jpg)](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2009/04/vote_report_india_header.jpg)

Equipped with all these the month long election was [closely watched by the
citizen journalists](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2009/04/17/indias-first-
digital-elections-evoke-strong-reactions-online/) and after the polls they
questioned [lower voter
turnouts](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2009/05/03/indian-
elections-2009-lower-voter-turnouts-and-questions-regarding-campaigns/) and
efficacy of campaigns.

When the results were declared it emerged that the [voters voted for no
change](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2009/05/16/india-votes-for-no-change/).
Indian [Twittersphere was quite
aloud](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2009/05/16/india-elections-2009-tapping-
into-the-twitter/) in reacting to the developments as the results surfaced.

**Online Campaigns:**

This year we also saw some successful online campaigns on various social
issues being launched in India. At the beginning of the year many Indians were
irked by the news that [a group of young women in Mangalore in the southern
state of Karnataka were attacked by Hindu vigilantes in a pub
(bar)](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2009/02/02/india-outrage-at-attacks-on-
women/). Soon an online campaign emerged by a Facebook group that planned [a
sassy, bold move to send pink colored women’s panties to the Ram Sena party as
a ‘Valentine's gift’](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2009/02/13/india-the-
pink-underwear-resistance/). This non violent protest was called the Pink
Chaddi (underwear) campaign.

The above video shows a pile of underwear and the love letters to the Hindu
vigilantes.

This year the first TEDIndia event took place and the bloggers were excited
about it. Read [their take on the
event](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2009/11/14/bloggers-remember-tedindia-
the-good-the-bad-and-the-quirky/).

[![](http://farm3.static.flickr.com/2693/4100648221_93eacd1084_o.jpg)](http://farm3.static.flickr.com/2693/4100648221_93eacd1084_o.jpg)

Other notable online campaigns included [the greatest driving
challenge](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2009/09/12/india-the-web-meets-the-
road-in-the-great-driving-challenge/) and [the sapling
project](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2009/12/24/india-the-sapling-
project/).

**Human Rights and Freedom Of Speech:**

Chyetanya Kunte, an Indian blogger based in the Netherlands, [was silenced by
legal threats](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2009/01/30/india-blogger-
silenced/) for criticizing a TV reporter for using sensationalism in her
report during the Mumbai terrorist attacks.

Shiv Shena, a far right political party [had
sued](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2009/02/28/shiv-senas-orkut-campaign-the-
limits-to-freedom-of-expression-in-an-intolerant-india/) a 19 year old Indian
netizen who criticized Shiv Sena in a social networking site.

The Indian state of Manipur was in chaos after pictures of an unarmed 27-year
old, being shot and killed by the police surfaced. [Citizen journalists
criticized](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2009/08/06/india-manipur-erupts-
over-a-murder/) the state and the media for ignoring this issue.

On the other hand there was a triumph of human rights as [an Indian court
ruling decriminalized gay
sex](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2009/07/03/india-court-ruling-
decriminalizes-gay-sex/) and a blogger termed the day of the ruling as a big
day in the history of independent India.

**Culture & Religion:**

[![](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-content/uploads/2009/01/slumdog-
millionaire-thumb.jpg)](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2009/01/slumdog-millionaire-thumb.jpg)Slumdog Millionaire, a
British film based on India [become the buzz of Indian
bloggers](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2009/01/26/india-reactions-to-
slumdog-millionaire/) as it had won four Golden Globe awards and was nominated
for ten categories at the Oscars. This film [sparked
debates](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2009/01/21/video-slumdog-millionaire-
and-the-indian-slums/) about how it shows life in India's slums, and the
attraction it holds for foreigners. But that did not stop the movie to [sweep
the Oscars with win in 8
categories](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2009/02/24/india-slumdog-
millionaire/).

There was an informative post explaining [Durga Puja and its
rituals](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2009/09/29/india-durga-puja-a-
daughter-comes-visiting/).

[![Bidding Goddess Durga farewell until next year. Photo by Aparna
Ray](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2009/09/Durgapuja09b-051-300x225.jpg)](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2009/09/Durgapuja09b-051-300x225.jpg)

Bidding Goddess Durga farewell until next year. Photo by Aparna Ray

_In the next part of this series we will look at Maldives, Nepal, Pakistan and
Sri Lanka. Please stay tuned._

