The Iranian government is not only world-class when it comes to persecuting
bloggers, they have also set numerous records: from the first jailed blogger
in history, to the first [blogger to die
](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2009/03/19/omid-reza-mir-sayafi-iranian-
blogger-dies-in-prison/)in prison. Unfortunately, a new record can now be
added to the list of Iran's repressive achievements: the youngest blogger to
be detained and put on trial.

_Reporters without Borders (RSF)_[ writes](http://en.rsf.org/iran-world-s-
youngest-detained-blogger-18-11-2010,38848.html) that the world’s youngest
detained blogger, 18-year-old Navid Mohebbi, is currently being tried behind
closed doors before a revolutionary court in the northern city of Amol. His
lawyer is not being allowed to attend the trial, which began on 14 November.
According to RSF, Mohebbi has been accused of “activities contrary to national
security” and “insulting the Islamic Republic’s founder and current leader (…)
by means of foreign media.”

_Change for Equality_ , a website supporting women's rights,
[says](http://www.we-change.org/english/spip.php?article782) more than 250
bloggers and women’s and civil rights activists have issued a statement
demanding the immediate and unconditional release of Navid Mohebbi.

As a young blogger, Navid shares both[ his life and
ideas](http://navidmohebbi3.blogfa.com/88062.aspx) in his blog. In 2009, he
wrote about doing sports, going to school, and even having a small operation
on his nose. “It has little bit deviation, but it can become little bit
nicer.” Navid wrote that he and his friends studied hard for university entry
exams and that he read books on civil disobedience, democracy and [The Second
Sex](https://secure.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/wiki/The_Second_Sex) by Simone
de Beauvoir.

He was finally accepted to Tehran’s Azad University to study political
science.

Now he is being held in the public ward of the prison in the city of Sari.

In March 2009, Navid [wrote ](http://navidmohebbi3.blogfa.com/88113.aspx) [fa]
in his blog:

> “…the intelligence office in Amol called my father and threatened me. These
> calls are illegal. Security forces in all countries are supposed to protect
> the citizens but here they are doing the opposite.

In one post from last winter, Navid wrote that he was arrested for no reason
in the street. After a few hours he was released when he gave away his email
and blog passwords. He was also ordered to report for interrogation at any
moment he was called.

Navid [writes](http://navidmohebbi3.blogfa.com/post-43.aspx) [fa]:

> The law is what your interrogator decides it to be. Your final judgment
> depends on Ministry of Intelligence orders rather than the country's
> judicial system… Then I came home and asked myself, when they will ever want
> to improve their behaviour.

The answer to Navid's question is unfortunately, not so soon.

Iran has a long history of persecuting bloggers and [sentencing
them](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2010/09/28/iranderakhshan-sentenced-
to-19-5-years-in-prison/) to long years of jail – and in once case also[whip
lashes](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2010/09/13/iran-jailed-blogger-shiva-
nazar-ahari-is-freed-on-500000-bail/).

Read more on the[ Iran page of _Threatened
Voices_](https://threatened.globalvoicesonline.org/bloggers/iran).

