Palestinian refugees are one of the biggest displaced populations in the
world, with the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees
in the Near East (UNRWA) providing assistance for some [4.7 million registered
refugees](http://www.unrwa.org/etemplate.php?id=86) in the [occupied
Palestinian territory](http://www.ochaopt.org/generalmaps.aspx?id=96), Jordan,
Lebanon and Syria. Millions more [displaced and emigrant
Palestinians](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Palestinian_diaspora) live around
the world. However, their attachment remains strong to the home they, or their
parents or grandparents, left behind. Two bloggers in Gaza have written about
the pain of exile.

Earlier this week the Libya-sponsored aid ship _Al-Amal_ (“hope”) [attempted
to sail to the Gaza
Strip](http://english.aljazeera.net/news/middleeast/2010/07/201071017258595579.html)
(but was [forced to change
course](http://english.aljazeera.net/news/middleeast/2010/07/2010713124046138256.html)
for Egypt). In Gaza, blogger _Kalam_ was thinking of someone he wished were
[on the ship](http://blog.amin.org/kalam/archives/300):

ترتدي وشاح الصلاة وتحمل مسبحة بين يديها وتدعو الله عز وجل – أو ربما تفعل فقط
كما ترى والديها يفعلان حينما تضيق بهما السبل- فتناجي الله أن يحقق أملها أو
بالأحرى أمل جدتها في رؤيتها واحتضانها وتقبيلها.  
هي هلا التي لم تكمل سنتها الأولى في الحياة بعد، ولكنها تحمل بالوراثة كل مشاعر
الفلسطيني المغترب، فهي ابنة للاجئ لم من يرى من أرضه شبرا واحدا طوال حياته،
ولأم تعيش مشتتة الفؤاد بين الوطن والغربة بين الأهل والزوج بين الأم والبيت بين
الأخوة والأبناء، فعقلها وجزء مهم من قلبها هناك وأهلها وبقية قلبها وذكرياتها
هنا.

She wears a prayer scarf and holds prayer beads between her hands, and asks
God – or maybe she is just doing what she has seen her parents do when things
get tough for them – she appeals to God to make real her wish or more
accurately her grandmother's wish to see her and hug her and kiss her.  
This is Hala, who has not yet completed her first year of life, but she
carries the inherited feelings of every Palestinian exile. She is the daughter
of a refugee who has seen not a single inch of his land his whole life, and of
a mother who lives with her heart split between her homeland and a foreign
country, between her family and her marriage, between her mother and her home,
between her siblings and her children. Her mind and an important part of her
heart are there, and her family and the rest of her heart and her memories are
here.

[![Hala, on http://blog.amin.org/kalam/](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2010/07/hala.jpg)](http://blog.amin.org/kalam/archives/300)

Hala

  
_Kalam_ continues:

هلا ابنة أختى الصغيرة التي تعيش في ليبيا ولا تستطيع القدوم إلى غزة – التي
أصبحت قبلة الجميع هذه الأيام- تسبح الله عز وجل وتدعوه أن يسمح لها بالقدوم إلى
غزة، فهي لا تتمكن من القدوم بسبب صعوبة الحصول على إقامة لها في ليبيا، الأمر
الذي لا يضمن لها العودة إلى هناك حيث والدها النازح – لا يمتلك رقم هوية – وبقية
عائلتها، تبحث هلا عمن يقول لها “يا هلا بيكي في وطنك”، تبحث عن من يوصلها لحضن
جدتها الحنون، التي تعشق أي صورة لها أو مقطع فيديو تظهر فيه.  
هلا تنتظر وكلها أمل، أمل أكبر من السفينة الليبية القادمة إلينا هنا، والتي كم
تمنيت أن تكون معهم لأقبلها، حين يصلون سأرى في كل واحد منهم جزء من صورة هلا،
وسأسألهم لماذا لم تأتوا بـ هلا معكم؟؟؟!!!

Hala is my young niece who lives in Libya and cannot come to Gaza – which has
become everyone's focus these days. Praise God and ask him to allow her to
come to Gaza… She is unable to come because of the difficulty of getting
residence in Libya, which means she cannot be sure of returning there where
her father who is a displaced person – he does not have an identity number –
and the rest of her family are. Hala is searching for someone to say, “Welcome
to your country”, and is searching for someone to put her in reach of the
affectionate embrace of her grandmother, who adores any picture of her or any
video clip in which she appears.  
Hala is waiting full of hope, a hope larger than the Libyan ship coming to us
here, which I have wished so much she were on so I could embrace her; when
they reach I will see in every one of them a piece of Hala's image, and I will
ask them why they did not bring Hala with them.

Also in Gaza, _Kawther Abu Hani_ listens to her mother
[reminisce](http://notes-night.blogspot.com/2010/07/blog-post_13.html):

نفسي اعرف شو صار لبيتنا الصغير اللي تركنا في الناصرة قبل سنين, كيف صار شكل
الجبل؟ و يمكن تغيرت ريحة الزعتر؟.. قديش كبرن صحباتي و صرت عندهن مجرد حكاية
لاولادهن.. يا الله حتى ما احضرت عرسهن, كان نفسي اعيش مراحل عمري معهن و أكتر شي
كنت استنى اليوم اللي نوعى فيه ع الحب و ننسى اللعب تنحب حتى ننهم.. يا الله بس
هم الحب مش زي هم الاحتلال. اسا انا اتزكرت.. دايما بتزكر..

“I would love to know what happened to our small house which we left in
[Nazareth](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Nazareth) years ago… What do the hills
look like now? And perhaps the scent of thyme has changed… How old my friends
have grown, and I have become just a story for their children… Goodness me, I
didn't even attend their weddings. I wanted to live through the stages of my
life with them, and most of all I was waiting for the day on which we would
learn about love and forget about games, when we'd fall in love until we
became depressed. Oh dear, but the worry of love is not like the worry of [the
Israeli] occupation. Now I remember…” She is always remembering.

