There are rumours that the Egyptian government is going to block Skype.
Bloggers react to the unconfirmed news in this post.

_Israa El Sakka_ wrote about the rumour
[here](http://israaelsakka.wordpress.com/2010/03/14/egypt-to-block-skype/).

She said:

In the past few days users has reported problems in logging in to Skype
through their Vodafone 3G stick modems.  
Vodafone’s customer service indicated that Telecom Egypt is going to block
Skype in Egypt, and that it’s out of their hands. After repeated calls from
various people to Vodafone’s customer service, they were told “Skype is being
blocked since 13th March based on an order from Telecom Egypt.”  
It won’t be surprising to find out that Egypt will block Skype, because you
don’t expect that much from a categorized Internet enemy state.

_Zeinobia_ on the other hand [isn't sure if the rumours are true or
not](http://egyptianchronicles.blogspot.com/2010/03/egypt-to-blocks-
skype.html).

She noted:

I do not know if this news is true or not , I have heard today's morning and I
can't check its accuracy. Already Skype works fine with TE Data which by its
turn is a subsidiary of Telecom Egypt. Still I will not be surprised to find
out that Egypt will block Skype because Telecom Egypt and Mobile phone
operators are mad that people are using Skype for free in international calls
!! It is more of economic reason I would say than political one actually.

And finally _Gr33n Data_ believes [that the government has nothing to do with
this](http://gr33ndata.blogspot.com/2010/03/is-skype-really-blocked-in-
egypt.html), but it's just Vodafone's policy.

He wrote:

As you can see, the source of the news are Vodafone users who are not able to
use Skype when they are connected to the internet via their 3G USB Modems. And
since many of the ADSL home users are reporting that Skype is working fine at
their places. Then I have strong feeling that the Egyptian government has
nothing to do with this. I believe it is just Vodafone's DPI that is blocking
Skype in order not to harm their revenues.

