[![Resala volunteers teach reading to blind
students](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2011/10/resalavolunteers-375x281.jpg)](https://www.facebook.com/photo.php?fbid=307207742638116&set=a.307207385971485.100164.145505648808327&type=3)

Resala volunteers teach reading to blind students – photo from Resala

It was the year 1999 and [Sherif Abdel-
Azim](http://www.aucegypt.edu/sse/eeng/faculty/Documents/Dr_Sherif_Abdelazeem.pdf)
was back in Egypt after finishing a Ph.D. in Electrical and Computer
Engineering in Canada. He taught Engineering Ethics to students at Cairo
University, and he also spoke to students about the differences between
charity organizations in Egypt and Canada.

[![Sherif Abdel-Azim](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2011/10/Screen-
shot-2011-10-27-at-5.38.42-PM.png)](http://www.aucegypt.edu/sse/eeng/faculty/Documents/Dr_Sherif_Abdelazeem.pdf)

Sherif Abdel-Azim

Abdel-Azim and his students decided to set up an informal charity group called
_Resala_ (Mission). They began offering services to students of the university
as well as to the general public – such as teaching free courses and offering
aid to orphanages and hospitals.

One year later, one of his students suggested they should build an orphanage.
One of her relatives donated land for them to build it on. From this moment
they decided to register as an official charity organization – also called
[Resala](http://www.resala.org) [ar].

Eleven years later, it's one of the biggest charity organizations in Egypt,
with more than 50 branches all over the country, tens of thousands of
volunteers, and [different
activities](http://abdelmonem-89.blogspot.com/2008/11/resala-egypts-leading-
ngo.html) that vary from blood donation and orphanages, to fighting
illiteracy. They [help blind people with their
studies](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Resala_%28organization%29) by recording
books for them on cassettes, and they refurbish used clothes and give it the
poor.

And much more.

Last May, [TEDxCairo](http://www.tedxcairo.com/) invited Sherif Abdel-Azim,
the founder of Resala, to give a speech about the organization, [stories he
witnessed there](http://www.resala.org/stories), and about volunteerism in
general [ar].

