In December 2006 a century-old Ceiba tree was cut down in the San Agustín
neighborhood of Havana, the Cuban capital. But this was more than a tree. It
was the symbol of the city and of the cultural heritage of this Caribbean
nation.

This sad event inspired a group of young Cubans to found _El Guardabosques_
(The Guardian of the Forest or Forest Ranger) in January 2007 with the mission
to “contribute to a better management of green spaces.”

El Guardabosques reported the death of the Ceiba tree by email to hundreds of
recipients, including government institutions.

“The response was incredible,”says Isbel Díaz, founder of the environmental
group, “and it prompted us to perform the first action: edit a digital
newsletter.” The group now publishes a free digital newsletter “to denounce
anti-ecological depredations in the urban environment.”

[![Isbel Díaz, founder of El Guardabosques](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2011/10/isbeldiaz-2op-225x300.jpg)](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2011/11/01/cuba-
guardians-of-urban-green-spaces/isbeldiaz-2op/)

Isbel Díaz, founder of El Guardabosques

The members of this project recognize the role of technology and virtual
networks in the creation of a community. According to Isbel Díaz, networks
allow you to build “your own communication channels to denounce the actions of
private or state institutions that violate the law, or that hidden in the
lagoons of the law, damage the environment.”

Thus El Guardabosques was born, a non-institutionalized network of people
passionate about nature [es]:

> A partir de un núcleo inicial de unas cinco personas, todas vecinos de San
> Agustín, se han ido sumando puntualmente personas y colectivos a este
> trabajo. Hay quienes han estado solo en la siembra de una postura y nunca
> más hemos coincidido, y están quienes han participado en casi todo lo que se
> hace.

From an initial core of five people, all residents of San Augustín, more
people and groups have been joining. Some people only participated in the
planting of a tree, never to be seen again, and there are others who have
participated in almost everything we do.

The most significant aspect of this project is its focus on inclusion and
participative democracy. There are no exclusions based on age, gender, sexual
orientation, religious belief, political affiliation or economic status to
participate in _El Guardabosques._

For over five years, the distribution of the newsletter on the Internet has
been complemented with hundreds of actions such as cleaning rivers, oceans and
landfills. In addition, community projects have focused on planting and caring
for trees.

Currently, _El Guardabosques’_ newsletter is sent to nearly 1,000 email
addresses. Seventy-eight percent belong to residents in Cuba who access the
Internet from the internal network, mainly from universities, research
institutes, cultural and artistic institutions. The group has also
participated in events like the panel “We think Cuba,” which is coordinated by
the [Hermanos Saiz Association](http://www.ahs.cu/).

![Planting of an Anacagüita](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2011/10/03-siembra-anacaguita-Isbel.jpg)

Planting of an Anacagüita. Photo: Courtesy of Isbel Díaz

In June 2009, _El Guardabosques_ joined the [Red Protagónica Observatorio
Crítico](http://observatoriocriticodesdecuba.wordpress.com/) [es], a network
which includes a [dozen
projects](http://observatoriocriticodesdecuba.wordpress.com/proyectos/) that
work on issues related to childhood, sexual diversity, race, information,
cultural promotion, among others. Participants inaugurated their fourth
meeting in 2010 by planting an Anacagüita tree in a nursery.

According to the newsletter:

> Trabajadoras del centro, encabezadas por su amable directora, niños de la
> comunidad, miembros de la Red Protagónica Observatorio Crítico, e invitados
> al evento decidimos colectivamente el mejor sitio para sembrar el arbolito,
> cavamos el hoyo, y sembramos y regamos la planta.

People who work at the center, led by its friendly director, children in the
community, members of Red Protagónica Observatorio Crítico, and guests,
collectively decided the best place to plant the little tree. We dug the hole,
planted the tree, and watered the plant.

The death of the Ceiba tree in San Agustín has inspired the creation of a
wonderful network of people who support each other and believe in
environmental causes. _El Guardabosque_ has also expanded its network of
environmentalists and has created a space for exchange with other projects.

