Francisco Rodríguez Cruz is a Cuban journalist and activist who for over a
year has maintained [a controversial
blog](http://paquitoeldecuba.wordpress.com/) [es] committed to advancing the
rights of the lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgender (LGBT) community in
Cuba. This is a community that has experienced a difficult history of
discrimination on the island.

Paquito, as he is commonly known on the web, does not only address issues of
sexual diversity and gay rights in his blog. He has also been writing of his
own personal experience, for the past five years, of battling HIV and [non-
Hodgkin lymphoma](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Non-Hodgkin_lymphoma), a type
of blood cancer.

“Those who have the privilege to access Internet from Cuba should aim always
at improving something in the country, not only deal with external
hostilities. Perhaps then we would develop much faster,” he says.

In a previous interview last year, [with Tele
Sur](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=7jIwtdMPhLk), Paquito was asked about his
blog and said, “At first, some people said it was impossible for someone with
my characteristics to exist in Cuba: HIV-positive, communist, gay, father,
journalist.” But Paquito, with all his multiple dimensions and complexity,
really does exist.

Here is the video of the Tele Sur interview [es]:

Paquito is a member of [Hombres por la
diversidad](http://hxdcuba.blogspot.com/) (Men for Diversity), a social
network of the state-run program [National Centre for Sex
Education](http://www.cenesexualidad.sld.cu/), but he has also supported civil
society and independent associations and the recently founded [Rainbow
Project](http://yasminsilvia.blogspot.com/2011/07/el-proyecto-arcoiris.html),
which aims to participate in debate on public policies and raise awareness of
institutional homophobia. They advocate changes to Cuban law that eradicate
discrimination based on sexual orientation or gender.

![Francisco Rodríguez, journalist and
blogger](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2011/09/paquito1-225x300.jpg)

Francisco Rodríguez, journalist and blogger at "Paquito el de Cuba."

On December 2, 2010, Paquito was received by Foreign Minister Bruno Rodríguez
Parrilla, at the ministry's headquarters, along with [other representatives of
civil society in Cuba](http://yasminsilvia.blogspot.com/2010/11/solicitud-de-
apoyo-la-declaracion-de-la.html) [es] who questioned Cuba's support for an
amendment to remove reference to sexual orientation from a United Nations
resolution condemning [summary
executions](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Summary_execution) (executions
without trial). During this meeting, the foreign minister said there would be
no changes in Cuba's policy to oppose any form of discrimination based on
sexual orientation or gender.

After this unusual dialogue, Paquito suggested to the authorities in March
2011 that they should support an international UN declaration to eliminate
“criminal penalties and other human rights violations based on sexual
orientation and gender identity.” And they did, [in
June](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2011/06/25/cuba-cuba-votes-for-lgbt-
resolution-at-un-human-rights-council/).

Meanwhile, Paquito continued denouncing irregularities committed by Cuban
police, who repeatedly fined visitors to a gay spot in central Habana.

Gerardo Arreola, a journalist from La Jornada in Mexico, [wrote about his
efforts](http://www.jornada.unam.mx/2011/05/03/sociedad/040n1soc) [es]:

> Su activismo ha tenido giros tan insólitos como el que lo puso frente a la
> policía, primero como infractor, luego como demandante y finalmente como
> interlocutor.

His activism has had twists so unusual, as to make him run in with the police,
first as an offender, then as a plaintiff, and finally as an equal.

Paquito is now fighting his latest battle. He has run, literally, after the
Cuban Minister of Justice, María Esther Reus, to [ask her what happened to the
updated draft of the Family
Code](http://paquitoeldecuba.wordpress.com/2011/08/02/mis-correrias-tras-la-
ministra-de-justicia-o-mas-sobre-demora-del-codigo-de-familia/), a law that
would approve, along with a number of important benefits for all Cubans, legal
marriage for couples of the same sex. The minister replied that she has until
2013 to submit the law for parliamentary consideration.

Paquito does not give up: “There will always have to be someone to ask the
questions that will prevent people from forgetting,” he says.

