![](https://globalvoices.org/wp-content/uploads/2017/06/DSC0217nxd-
pc-800x533.jpg)

Red Lacewing. Photo by Susheel Shrestha. Used with permission.

The Himalayan country of Nepal has always fascinated trekkers, climbers,
wildlife lovers and adrenaline junkies. However, if you’re a
[lepidopterist](http://www.dictionary.com/browse/lepidopterist), it’s the
perfect place to follow your passion. Nepal boasts of having more than [650
species of butterflies](http://www.welcomenepal.com/things-to-do/butterfly-
watching.html), accounting for 3.72 per cent of world’s butterfly species.

Butterflies are found everywhere in Nepal – from the jungles in the southern
plains to the mountains in the northern part. The hills around the Kathmandu
Valley are good areas for spotting the winged creatures. The March-June and
August-October periods are the [peak butterfly watching
seasons](http://nepalitimes.com/article/Nepali-Times-Buzz/the-butterfly-
effect-nepal-butterfly-destination,797).

[Susheel Shrestha](https://www.facebook.com/Susheelshrestha), a freelance
photographer, has captured more than 150 species of butterflies found in Nepal
from the lowlands to a height of 3810 meters in Upper Mustang.

Winner of many national photo competitions, Shrestha told Global Voices: “The
butterfly habitat is decreasing day by day due to increasing human
population.”

Bitten by the bug of nature and wildlife photography, Shrestha continues to
capture the butterflies and plans to produce a coffee table book to showcase
Nepal’s beauty and promote tourism in the country.

Here are some of the butterflies he has shot with his camera in different
parts of Nepal.

![](https://globalvoices.org/wp-content/uploads/2017/06/DSC9903nxd-
copy-800x533.jpg)

Lime Swallowtail. Photo by Susheel Shrestha. Used with permission.

![](https://globalvoices.org/wp-content/uploads/2017/06/DSC_5873nxd-
copy-800x533.jpg)

Oriental Common Evening Brown. Photo by Susheel Shrestha. Used with
permission.

![](https://globalvoices.org/wp-
content/uploads/2017/06/DSCF5389-copy-800x533.jpg)

Indian Cabbage White. Photo by Susheel Shrestha. Used with permission.

![](https://globalvoices.org/wp-content/uploads/2017/06/DSC_0846nxd-
copy-800x533.jpg)

Indian Cabbage White on mustard flowers. Photo by Susheel Shrestha. Used with
permission.

![](https://globalvoices.org/wp-content/uploads/2017/06/DSC_1862nxd-pc-
copy-800x533.jpg)

Group of Three-Spot Grass Yellow. Photo by Susheel Shrestha. Used with
permission.

![](https://globalvoices.org/wp-content/uploads/2017/06/DSC_2742nxd-
copy-800x533.jpg)

Three-Spot Grass Yellow mating. Photo by Susheel Shrestha. Used with
permission.

![](https://globalvoices.org/wp-content/uploads/2017/06/DSC_8624nxdd-
cp-800x533.jpg)

Oriental Lemon Emigrant. Photo by Susheel Shrestha. Used with permission.

![](https://globalvoices.org/wp-content/uploads/2017/06/DSC4818nxd-
copy-800x533.jpg)

Yamfly. Photo by Susheel Shrestha. Used with permission.

![](https://globalvoices.org/wp-
content/uploads/2017/06/DSC_8646-copy-800x533.jpg)

Tailed Jay. Photo by Susheel Shrestha. Used with permission.

Shrestha isn't the only one documenting Nepal's butterflies. A British
national, Colin Smith, spent more than 50 years studying butterflies in Nepal.
He traveled to 40 districts collecting 25,000 butterflies and wrote the book
Illustrated Checklist of Nepal’s Butterflies.

The butterflies collected by Smith — aka ‘[Putali
Baje](http://kathmandupost.ekantipur.com/printedition/news/2011-07-07/putali-
baje-who-grew-grey-haired-studying-butterflies-in-nepal.html)’ meaning
‘Butterfly Granddad’ in Nepali — have been displayed at Natural History
Museum, Kathmandu; Annapurna Butterfly Museum, Pokhara; and at Kathmandu
University in Dhulikhel.

