[![faroe islands translate](https://globalvoices.org/wp-
content/uploads/2017/10/faroe-islands-
translate.png)](https://www.faroeislandstranslate.com/#!/)

Screen captions from [Faroe Islands
Translate](https://www.faroeislandstranslate.com/#!/) website. Image mixed by
Nevin Thompson.

What do you do when your national language doesn't show up in Google
Translate? If you're the Faroe Islands, you just crowd-source your own
solution.

[Faroe Islands Translate](https://www.faroeislandstranslate.com/) is a
fascinating and fun website created by Visit Faroe Islands, the tourism
authority for the islands, and [Atlantic
Airways](https://www.atlantic.fo/en/about-us/the-company/history/), the
country's official airline. On the website, locals demonstrate how common (and
not so common) words and phrases from a variety of languages — including
English, Spanish and French — are spoken in Faroese, the country's official
language:

> On our website, Faroese volunteers will live-translate words or sentences
> for free. It’s simple. You write, and a random Faroese volunteer will
> translate by sending a live translation which they have filmed with their
> smartphone.

The results of this project are often delightful:

[![life is wonderful in faroese](https://globalvoices.org/wp-
content/uploads/2017/10/snip_20171012213413.png)](https://www.faroeislandstranslate.com/#!/?videoKey=a3f30d4f-a99d-4754-b896-eb4bd2dcde95&lang=en)

Screen caption from Faroe Islands Translate. [Click to view
translation](https://www.faroeislandstranslate.com/#!/?videoKey=a3f30d4f-a99d-4754-b896-eb4bd2dcde95&lang=en).

Since translation requests are all crowd-sourced from the Internet, the
website features a wide variety of phrases in Faroese, from asking directions
to how to ask a Faroe Islander for a date. Thanks to the website, no matter
what time of day it is, there is always someone ready to translate for you in
real-time.

![faroe island translate](https://globalvoices.org/wp-
content/uploads/2017/10/snip_20171012214325.png)

Screen caption from Faroe Islands Translate. [Click here to view
translation](https://www.faroeislandstranslate.com/#!/?videoKey=3d30af04-44ae-4e0d-b512-99712af18c00&lang=en).

The Faroe Islands form an archipelago located in the Atlantic Ocean to the
north of Scotland. An autonomous country within the kingdom of Denmark, the
Faroe Islands are home to about [50,000
people](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Faroe_Islands), making
[Faroese](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Faroese_language) a [minority
language](http://www.ethnologue.com/18/language/fao/) and [a challenge for
Google Translate](https://www.theguardian.com/education/2014/feb/17/languages)
to address accurately.

Between full-time residents of the islands and islanders who now live in other
parts of the world, [there are about 75,000 speakers of
Faroese](https://www.faroeislands.fo/arts-culture/language/). The language of
the archipelago is descended from Old West Norse which was spoken by the Norse
settlers who arrived on the islands in the 9th Century.

This isn't the first time the Faroe Islanders have literally put themselves on
the map. In 2016, with their country still not appearing on Google Street
View, the tourism commission decided to launch
[Sheepview360](http://visitfaroeislands.com/sheepview360/). Five of the
island’s sheep were fitted with a 360-degree camera in order to take panoramic
images of the entire country. Shortly afterward, [Google Maps showed
up](http://visitfaroeislands.com/sheepview360/google-has-arrived/) to map the
Faroe Islands.

It is now Google Translate's turn to catch-up to the island's clever, do-it-
yourself solutions.

