Starting from North Korean leadership change, to Gangnam Style spreading over
the world and finally the presidential election in December, 2012 has been a
dramatic year in South Korea. Here are the top seven Korean stories which
created major social media buzz this year.

**1\. Psy’s Gangnam style**

Korean rapper, Psy's [Gangnam Style
video](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=9bZkp7q19f0) went truly viral, starting
from mid-July and has continued dominating online space worldwide over the
year. It has recently became the [first-ever Youtube video to hit 1 billion
view](http://www.nydailynews.com/entertainment/music-arts/psy-gangnam-style-
reaches-1-billion-youtube-views-article-1.1225110), bringing tremendous fame
to Psy and creating various memes and parodies internationally.

Read how [Koreans reacted to Psy's unexpected
success](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2012/08/29/south-korea-perspectives-
on-k-pop-viral-video-gangnam-style/), [the ten 10
parodies](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2012/11/03/top-10-gangnam-style-
parodies/) and even the [Gangnam-inspired activist
videos](http://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PLXhuzKSXJ9ORFAXwZzRaijx53RK7KWGMS).

**2\. North Korean satellite launch and Kim Jung-un**

As the North Korean dictator, Kim Jung-Il died of a suspected heart attack on
Dec 2011, the young successor, [Kim Jong-
un](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Kim_Jong-un), was nominated as the next
leader of the hermit kingdom, North Korea. The young Kim has continued his
father military rule and the brinksmanship strategies throughout the year and
tried several satellite launches, one in December and [a previous one in early
April](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2012/04/13/perspectives-on-north-koreas-
unsuccessful-rocket-launch/), which has invited international blame for both
increasing already heightened tension in the East Asia region, but also for
ignoring mass starvation of its own people.

![North Korean Soldier at DMZ](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2012/04/JointSecurityAreaNorthKoreans-375x279.jpg)

North Korean Soldier at DMZ, public domain

Many media organizations claim the launch in December [was
successful](http://www.guardian.co.uk/world/2012/dec/12/north-korea-launches-
rocket) and bloggers came up with their own analyses. A prominent North Korean
tech blogger [wrote](http://www.northkoreatech.org/2012/12/15/tracking-north-
koreas-satellite/) about how the satellite can be tracked and concluded in
[his latest post](http://www.northkoreatech.org/2012/12/25/caught-on-video-
north-koreas-satellite/), though its in the right orbit, the satellite might
be not be fully-functional.

**3.[History's
child](http://www.time.com/time/magazine/article/0,9171,2130926,00.html)**

Through the December 19 presidential election, [Park Geun-
hye](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Park_Geun-hye), the former dictator's
daughter, [was elected the next
president](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2012/12/20/former-dictators-
daughter-elected-as-president-of-south-korea/  ) and the first-ever female
president in South Korea. Park's father, despite a dramatic economic growth
made under his rule, was notorious for his authoritarian, military rule and
many, as mentioned in [this previous GV
post](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2012/09/25/south-korea-presidential-
nominee-stumbles-over-unresolved-history/), voiced worries over Park's vague
stance on her father's rule.

![Park Geun-hye during campaign](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2012/12/8279443801_f3bee3051e-375x249.jpg)

Park Geun-hye during campaign, Upload by Flickr User 박근혜 공식앨범 (CC 2.0 BY-NC-
SA)

**4\. Twitter arrest**

Park Jung-geun, a South Korean photographer/activist, was [arrested for
retweeting](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2012/02/09/south-korea-activist-
indicted-for-retweeting-north-korean-messages/) North Korean official Twitter
account's messages in January this year, making more headlines in
international news than in local news.The verdict came out in November and
Park was sentenced to a suspended 10 month jail term.

![north korea soldier parody image](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2012/02/north-korea-375x285.png)

Park's Parody of a North Korean Soldier/Poster, which has spread wide across
Korean web, many times tweeted and memed, Park tweeted this image (the
original source/link unclear and the author did not specify/claim copyrights).

**5\. 6-month media strike**

The year 2012 has ridden with various walk-outs, but the media strike which
continued for nearly half a year, clearly stood out amongst them. Previously,
[GV explained why](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2012/03/21/south-korea-
three-major-tv-stations-protest-for-fair-journalism/) journalists and
producers of one of the the nations biggest network TV,
[MBC](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Munhwa_Broadcasting_Corporation), staged
mass protests against its chairman and introduced citizen's wide support for
their fight.

MBC chairman [Kim Jae-
Cheol](http://ko.wikipedia.org/wiki/%EA%B9%80%EC%9E%AC%EC%B2%A0) [ko] has been
accused of corruption, siding with the government on major issues and
allegedly silencing critics within his company by firing or reprimanding them,
as can be seen from [the mass
firing](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2012/08/06/south-korea-mass-firing-of-
tv-writers-from-investigative-program/) of the writers from MBC's signature
investigative program.

![Ahn Caricature](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2012/11/Ahn_caricature-234x300.jpg)

A Caricature of Ahn, Uploaded by Flickr User 안철수의 진심캠프 (CC-BY-NC-SA 2.0)

**6\. Ahn Cheol-soo phenomenon**

[Ahn Cheol-soo](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ahn_Cheol-soo), the founder of
the iconic [antivirus
software](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Antivirus_software "Antivirus
software") company [AhnLab](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/AhnLab_Inc "AhnLab
Inc"), who also happens to be a doctor and a former
[professor](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Professor "Professor") and dean of
the prestigious [Seoul National
University](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Seoul_National_University "Seoul
National University"), dominated the nation's political news section
throughout the year as he decided to run for the presidency.

Ahn has a reputation of being apolitical and the least corrupt candidate in
the nation's recent political history. His unexpected dropout of the
presidential race despite his high popularity, shocked Koreans and [made lot
of them talk on Twitter](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2012/11/26/beloved-
presidential-candidate-in-south-korea-bows-out/).

**7\. Social media clash with Election Laws**

As the presidential election became the major course of discussion starting
mid-year, there were conflicts between citizen's political activities in
social media and the nation's strict, often criticized as ‘outdated’, election
law.

Beside the [nation-wide calls for longer poll
hours](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2012/10/02/south-korean-voters-calling-
for-longer-poll-hours/ ), lots of litigation and summons were initiated over
so-called ‘illegal campaign activities’. The political podcast
[Naggomsu](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Naneun_Ggomsuda) (meaning ‘I am a
petty-minded creep’), famous for its investigative reporting and shrill
mockery of the current President and his conservative ruling party became an
easy target. This year, its influential podcasters were either being arrested,
charged, or summoned for questioning over their alleged illegal campaign
activities in podcasts, [as GV
covered](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2012/05/21/south-korea-police-
question-influential-podcasters-for-campaign-violations/), showing that 2012
has been not an easy year in the citizen's social media/online political
engagement front.

