**_This post is part of our special coverage[Syria Protests
2011](https://globalvoicesonline.org/specialcoverage/syria-protest-2011/)._**

Following the [worst day of
violence](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2011/07/31/syria-tanks-enter-hama-on-
eve-of-ramadan/) Syria has seen since protests broke out across the country in
February, Syrian opposition and their supporters around the world have begun
an attempt to raise global awareness of events in the country, utilizing a
hashtag,
[#RamadanMassacre](https://twitter.com/#!/search?q=%23RamadanMassacre), that
was started on Sunday to keep track of reports from the city of Hama.

@nmoawad, from Lebanon, [summed up the purpose of the
campaign](https://twitter.com/#!/nmoawad/status/98141993674358784) in a tweet
early Monday morning:

> Join us in raising awareness by tweeting using the hashtag #RamadanMassacre
> for #Hama | 2am Cairo Time

[![](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2011/08/latuff-375x241.gif)](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2011/08/02/syria-
can-tweets-prevent-a-massacre/latuff/)

Brazilian cartoonist Carlos Latuff depicts Syrian President Bashar Al-Assad
atop a tank

Syrian Twitter user @LeShaque [shared his
thoughts](https://twitter.com/#!/LeShaque/status/98197187254689793):

> I'll leave it to my Kurdish compatriots to provide you with a list of
> massacres they've suffered at the hands of Assads. #RamadanMassacre

@BachaarArnaout [offered a tweet of
support](https://twitter.com/#!/BachaarArnaout/status/98199299774627840) to
Syrian protesters:

> Since march, +2000 have been killed by #Assad in #Syria but the brave people
> are determined to topple the regime. #RamadanMassacre

[![An avatar in remembrance of Sunday's events in Hama, used by Twitter
users](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2011/08/hama_pic.jpg)](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2011/08/02/syria-
can-tweets-prevent-a-massacre/hama_pic/)

An avatar in remembrance of Sunday's events in Hama, used by Twitter users

Utilizing an avatar created for remembrance of Sunday's events in Hama, US-
based @ran00n95 [posted in
solidarity](https://twitter.com/#!/ran00n95/status/98199011995025408):

> u will not silence us we the world know what u have done and we will not
> stay silent and let it continue #RamadanMassacre #Syria

@rallaf issued a call to Muslim readers,
[asking](https://twitter.com/#!/rallaf/status/98120955171315712):

> What did you have for Iftar today? #Hama residents had tank shells.
> #RamadanMassacre #Syria

But in response to a tweet from [@zmossabasha](http://twitter.com/zmossabasha)
that stated, “A tweet can prevent a massacre!!”, NPR journalist Andy Carvin
[asked](https://twitter.com/#!/acarvin/status/98196828721385473), “Can it?”,
echoing the sentiment of many who have suggested that, while social media can
most certainly expand awareness, it may have little impact on events in
countries like Syria, where the state clearly has the upper hand.

Nevertheless, the campaign continues, as Syrian opposition and their
supporters attempt to get the
[#RamadanMassacre](https://twitter.com/#!/search?q=%23RamadanMassacre) hashtag
to trend on Twitter's trending topics list.

**_This post is part of our special coverage[Syria Protests
2011](https://globalvoicesonline.org/specialcoverage/syria-protest-2011/)._**

