![](https://globalvoices.org/wp-content/uploads/2017/02/CA-polit-
map-757x600.png)

Central Asia political map. [Licensed
](https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Central_Asia_-
_political_map_2008.svg)under the Creative Commons Attribution-Share Alike 3.0
Unported license.

**_The following is a[partner post](http://www.eurasianet.org/node/82536) from
[EurasiaNet.org](http://www.eurasianet.org/) written by [Zukhra
Iakupbaeva](http://www.eurasianet.org/taxonomy/term/5446), an author from
Kyrgyzstan who also [writes](https://globalvoices.org/author/zukhra-
iakupbaeva/) for Global Voices. Republished with permission._**

In a rough neighborhood for journalists, Kyrgyzstan is a relative safe haven.
Over the years, reporters from various parts of Central Asia have made their
homes there — often for safety and professional growth, other times for more
personal reasons.

The Reporters Without Borders press freedom index for 2016 tells a clear
story. Central Asia is not hospitable territory for the free flow of
information and independent journalism. Nations like Turkmenistan and
Uzbekistan languish at the bottom of the list, alongside such places as North
Korea and Ethiopia. Meanwhile, media outlets in Tajikistan have long endured
pressure, but repression has intensified since late 2015 and has prompted the
[flight](http://www.eurasianet.org/node/81071) of dozens of journalists.

The stories of three journalistic migrants from various spots in Central Asia
are illustrative of how Bishkek has established itself as the chief
destination for those seeking creative and intellectual freedom.

Diana Rakhmanova, a 27-year-old journalist from Tajikistan, said a visit to
Kyrgyzstan in 2010 to attend a three-month course organized by German
broadcaster Deutsche Welle completely changed her understanding of journalism.

“What shocked me most when I was in Bishkek were the ordinary educated people
interested in politics, who had access to information from state officials.
State officials are the ones who are afraid of journalists, and there was an
active use of social networks,” Rakhmanova told
[EurasiaNet.org](http://eurasianet.org/) as she sipped coffee in one of
Bishkek’s many cafes.

A lucky break enabled Rakhmanova to get to know a local journalist who offered
her a job in Bishkek, where she returned a year after her course. She had to
make tough adjustments, she said. “I could not remember any of the Kyrgyz
surnames and had no clue whatsoever about parliamentary factions,” she said.

Her ethnic Tatar background helped her get to grips with some aspects of the
language. “I understand when people reply to me in Kyrgyz when I have asked my
question in Russian. This is because I know Tatar very well; my family back in
Tajikistan speaks it freely.”

Occasionally, regional tensions have created bureaucratic hassles. “One time I
was not allowed to cross the Kyrgyz border from Kazakhstan because of a border
shooting incident in a disputed section of the Kyrgyz-Tajik border,” she said.
“I am also a citizen of Russia, so the Russian passport helped me get across
that time.”

Rakhmanova said she had no plans to return to Tajikistan.

“I do not want to go back to Tajikistan because I wouldn’t be able to get used
to a lack of freedom of speech,” she said. “And I have a family here, a
husband and a one-year-old son.”

In other cases, family matters and relationships sometimes trump professional
motivations for journalists.

Elyor Nematov, a 28-year-old photojournalist from the city of Bukhara in
Uzbekistan, said his friends were surprised when he decided to move to the
Kyrgyz capital, Bishkek. He explained that he wanted to be nearer to his
fiancee, who lived in the Kyrgyz capital, and only later discovered
opportunities to hone his skills as a documentary photographer.

Nematov said that back in Uzbekistan it was not his work, but his Bahai faith
that caused him problems.

“When I was a student, police suspected I could be an extremist because I am a
Bahai. In Tashkent, police detained me for 15 days because I supposedly
resisted them when they were conducting an anti-extremism special operation.
In fact, they were recording me and I asked them to show me their documents
and explain to me why I was being arrested,” he said.

Nematov embraces a relaxed philosophy about where he lives. “I do not feel
borders, my base is Kyrgyzstan, but I am reporting on Central Asia,” he said.

Like Rakhmanova, Nematov has no immediate plans to leave Kyrgyzstan. Instead,
his dream for now is to set up a documentary photojournalism hub in Bishkek
that would support people doing his line of work across all of Central Asia.

The most unforgiving place in Central Asia for independent-minded reporters
and researchers is Turkmenistan. The very few people there who have dared to
dabble in independent journalism have found themselves on the receiving end of
[intimidation, arrests and physical
assault](https://rsf.org/en/news/turkmenistan-election-takes-place-amid-
growing-crackdown-journalists).

Olga, 33, came to Bishkek from Turkmenistan in 2001. She now works as a
political analyst at a Bishkek educational institution and writes occasional
commentary pieces on human rights, education, and oil and gas issues in
Turkmenistan.

Olga first traveled to Kyrgyzstan as a student. “I spent almost the whole time
of my freshman year at the American University of Central Asia in Bishkek in
the library. I would read avidly, it was such a pleasure,” Olga told
EurasiaNet.org, requesting she be identified only through a pseudonym.

The mid-2000s were a dark era for learning in Turkmenistan. In February 2005,
the late President Saparmurat Niyazov decreed that provincial libraries were
useless since most villagers did not read anyhow. In line with that reasoning,
Niyazov ordered the closure of almost all of the country’s libraries with the
exception of a few larger ones and student libraries.

This and other policies engineered to ensure Turkmenistan’s isolation from the
world led Olga to understand that her options would be limited at home. “I
remained in Kyrgyzstan because it was difficult to find a job [relevant to my
qualifications] in Turkmenistan,” Olga said, adding that she was limited by
not knowing Turkmen. “Oil and gas companies, which were flourishing at that
time, would have been the most likely option, but I was looking more at the
area of social development.”

Asked if she had plans to ever return to Turkmenistan, Olga said she preferred
not to think about it, and is focusing instead on her further studies and her
six-year-old son. The sense of freedom instilled in her by her experiences in
Kyrgyzstan would be hard to reconcile with the pervasive repression in
Turkmenistan.

To underscore how challenging the environment is back home, Olga recalled that
when Kyrgyzstan’s revolution unfolded in 2005, she was a student at the
American University of Central Asia. Her parents received a call from the
security services. “They [security agents] were interested to know if I was
involved in the revolution,” she said.

