[![Illustration by Nicolas Lampert. Made freely available by artist collective
Justseeds. ](https://globalvoices.org/wp-content/uploads/2016/12/Water-is-
Life_bk_1500.jpeg)](http://justseeds.org/graphic/water-is-life-bw-version/)

Illustration by Nicolas Lampert. Made available for distribution by US-based
artist collective [Justseeds](http://justseeds.org/graphics/).

The protest at Standing Rock Reservation in North Dakota, US has mobilized
[hundreds](http://www.nytimes.com/interactive/2016/09/12/us/12tribes.html) of
Native American tribes as well as solidarity across the world. The protests
are against the construction of [the Dakota Access
Pipeline](http://www.daplpipelinefacts.com/), a multi-billion dollar project
that would transport almost half a million barrels of oil per day across the
northern US. The pipeline could contaminate the Missouri River, a key water
source for the region. It would also cross through a prominent Sioux burial
site.

Although the US government stated last week that it would not grant the
easement–the right to cross or use someone's land–under Lake Oahe for the
Dakota Access Pipeline construction, the struggle is not over. The
announcement cited that further examination was needed, and that an
[Environmental Impact Statement
](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Environmental_impact_statement)will be
initiated. Demonstrators have said they [plan to remain in the
camps](http://www.npr.org/2016/12/11/505147166/in-their-own-words-the-water-
protectors-of-standing-rock) surrounding the northern edge of the reservation.

The Standing Rock protests started in April 2016, when members of the Standing
Rock Sioux tribe set up camp to block the construction. Known as “water
protectors” for their commitment to protect the Missouri River from possible
contamination by the pipeline’s construction, the activists have implemented
peaceful tactics to fight construction.

However, in the past months their encampments have been met with an
[aggressive response by police](https://www.theguardian.com/us-
news/2016/oct/29/dakota-access-pipeline-native-american-protesters), including
being tear gassed, shot with rubber bullets, and sprayed with water in below
freezing temperatures. Police also have been using [various surveillance
techniques](https://www.justsecurity.org/34449/investigating-surveillance-
standing-rock/) in order to identify who is participating in the protests and
what exactly they are doing while at the camps.

In the [following video](https://www.facebook.com/voicesofstandingrock/), you
can hear some stories from indigenous activists in the front line:

### Solidarity from around the globe

Under the #NoDAPL and #WaterIsLife battle cries, activists have pulled
together solidarity across the world, from groups like the [Black Lives
Matter](http://blacklivesmatter.com/) movement and [Code
Pink](http://www.codepink.org/dear_native_americans) in the United States,
which takes a stand against violence and racism toward African-Americans, to
activists from the Middle East and indigenous peoples from New Zealand to
Latin America.

An outpouring of support has grown in the last months for Standing Rock, with
people organizing solidarity protests in
[Palestine](http://www.salon.com/2016/11/18/palestinians-support-indigenous-
nodapl-protests-we-stand-with-standing-rock/) and [Morocco ](http://www.truth-
out.org/news/item/38475-standing-rock-morocco-indigenous-protesters-act-in-
solidarity-against-corporate-polluters)and dozens of other cities worldwide.
[United Nations observers have been dispatched to Standing
Rock](http://www.commondreams.org/news/2016/11/01/un-observers-monitoring-
abuses-against-standing-rock-water-protectors) to monitor human rights abuses
and still many others, including [veterans of the US
army](http://www.huffingtonpost.com/entry/forgiveness-ceremony-unites-
veterans-and-natives-at-standing-rock-casino_us_5845cdbbe4b055b31398b199),
have visited the encampments to provide support for the water protectors.

In October, local sources reported that the Morton County Sheriff’s Department
was following [Facebook check-ins by
protesters](http://www.npr.org/sections/thetwo-way/2016/11/01/500268879/more-
than-a-million-check-in-on-facebook-to-support-the-standing-rock-sioux), in an
effort to track their activities. This led over a million people to check in
to Standing Rock in an attempt to obfuscate police efforts. Though the
Sheriff’s Department [denied they were
using](http://www.latimes.com/nation/la-na-standing-rock-
facebook-20161031-story.html) Facebook check-ins to monitor the protests, the
response nevertheless demonstrated the widespread sense of solidarity that
people around the world are expressing for the protesters.

Indigenous activists from around the world also have shown their support for
Standing Rock. In October, [Mayan women from Guatemala traveled to Standing
Rock](http://remezcla.com/culture/mayan-elders-guatemala-standing-rock-
solidarity-nodapl/) in an effort to build solidarity among indigenous people
fighting environmental racism and in defense of land and territory. Defense of
land and life against the threat of environmental destruction has a long
history in Guatemala, while government repression of indigenous movements and
peoples continues to date.

In the Latin American news network Telesur video below, Juanita Lopez of the
Maya Mam Council addresses [the Standing Rock Sioux
tribe](http://standingrock.org/). She says:

> You are lighting a path for our people. And you have tremendous
> responsibility and a gift in this moment for uniting so many people. Stay
> strong. Be strong. And you have relatives all over the world to stand with
> you. And even though it's for a brief moment, we will take it with us, and
> it will be forever in our memory and in our hearts.

Other prominent leaders of Latin American indigenous movements have visited,
such as the Panamanian Cándido Mezúa Salazar, member of the [Mesoamerican
Alliance of Peoples and Forests](http://www.alianzamesoamericana.org/).

In an
[interview](http://internacional.elpais.com/internacional/2016/11/02/estados_unidos/1478048711_259194.html)
with Spanish newspaper El Pais, Salazar talked about the importance of
indigenous solidarity especially on issues of environmental justice in the
region. “Historical relations exist between the indigenous communities of the
North, Center and South, and there have been several instances of cooperation
between our peoples,” said Salazar.

He added:

> We have been fighting for years in order to have our ties to our lands
> respected and for the recognition of our rights.

