![Huang Qi. Photo via Radio Free Asia.](https://globalvoices.org/wp-
content/uploads/2016/12/huang-qi-800x451.jpg)

Huang Qi. Photo via Radio Free Asia.

_This post was written by Catherine Lai and originally published on Hong Kong
Free Press (HKFP)[](https://www.hongkongfp.com/2016/11/30/founder-of-chinese-
citizen-news-site-taken-from-his-home-during-police-raid-as-crackdown-
continues)on November 30, 2016. The version below is published on Global
Voices under a partnership agreement._

The founder of a Chinese citizen news site has been detained after police
searched his home. Huang Qi is the third well-known rights defence figure in
China to disappear or be detained in a fortnight, after the disappearances of
lawyer Jiang Tianyong and citizen journalist Liu Feiyue, who activists believe
to be in police custody.

Police in Sichuan burst into the home of the
[](https://advox.globalvoices.org/2016/11/18/despite-suppression-founder-of-
prize-winning-chinese-citizen-journalism-website-remains-optimistic)64
Tianwang founder, searching it and detaining Huang on Monday night, a local
activist told US-backed Radio Free Asia (RFA). They had a search warrant, she
said.

News of his disappearance was posted on Twitter by Pu Fei, a volunteer at the
64 Tianwang site, but the tweet was deleted and Pu has been unable to be
contacted since then, according to information posted by Hong Kong-based
rights watch website Weiquanwang. A call made to Pu appeared to suggest that
his phone was turned off.

Huang’s mother told RFA that the police took photos and looked through Huang’s
possessions.

According to the two witnesses, officers from Mianyang and Neijiang — areas
hit by the 2008 Sichuan earthquake — were present. Huang was jailed in
November 2011 after he investigated allegations that poor construction
contributed to the deaths of schoolchildren in the disaster.

Huang was recently [](https://www.hongkongfp.com/2016/10/26/founder-of-rights-
defence-website-in-china-detained-as-key-meeting-convenes-house-
searched)detained during a major meeting of Communist Party elite in October.
Photos showed that his home had been searched, with items scattered on the
floor. His computer was also taken by authorities.

HKFP’s calls to Huang Qi’s mobile phone went unanswered.

Tianwang is an independent news site that posts articles and information about
human rights incidents in China, including detentions by police, forced
demolitions, petitioner activism and demonstrations. It recently received the
2016 Reporters Without Borders Press Freedom Prize. Nine citizen journalists
who have contributed to the site are currently detained, and five are on bail,
according to Tianwang.

On Wednesday, Chinese Human Rights Defenders (CHRD), a network of Chinese and
international human rights NGOs, released a statement urging the Chinese
government to release Huang, lawyer Jiang Tianyong and citizen journalist Liu
Feiyue.

![Jiang Tianyong and Liu Feiyue. Photo via Radio Free
Asia.](https://globalvoices.org/wp-content/uploads/2016/12/jiang-and-
liu-400x225.jpg)

Jiang Tianyong and Liu Feiyue. Photo via Radio Free Asia.

Jiang Tianyong is a disbarred lawyer who recently worked to
[](https://www.hongkongfp.com/china-lawyer-crackdown)publicize China’s
crackdown on lawyers. He has
[](https://www.hongkongfp.com/2016/11/28/activists-continue-to-pressure-
chinese-authorities-over-missing-activist-jiang-tianyong)not been heard from
since last Monday. Liu Feiyue, the founder of a rights watch website, was
[](https://www.hongkongfp.com/2016/11/25/founder-chinese-rights-watch-website-
missing-week-said-detained)reportedly taken by police last Thursday. A family
member said he was being criminally detained for inciting subversion of state
power, but the family has not received any formal notification from police.

CHRD said:

> From information CHRD has received, police are believed to be holding the
> men in unknown locations, raising fears that they are at risk of torture […]
> The detention and disappearance in quick succession of these well-known
> leading figures of China’s rights defense movement further signal the
> escalation of President Xi Jinping’s relentless crackdown on civil society.

