![Screenshots from some of the participants of the Indigenous Language
Challenge](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2014/11/pizap3-800x295.jpg)

Screenshots of some of the participant videos from the Indigenous Language
Challenge

[Love it or hate
it](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ice_Bucket_Challenge#Criticism), the online
buzz surrounding the Ice Bucket Challenge earlier this year brought more
awareness to the disease amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS). Participants
filmed themselves dumping cold water on their heads and challenging another
person to do the same or donate money toward research for a cure.

Now a similar concept aimed at awareness for indigenous languages is making
its way around the internet. In the Indigenous Language Challenge, the one who
accepts the challenge must record a video speaking an indigenous language and
tap someone else to do the same. The outcome has been a wide range of people
around the world who are producing videos, some for the first time, as a way
to proudly share their language online and encouraging more to do the same.

A [Facebook group](https://www.facebook.com/groups/539092832857899/) was
created to collect links to the videos, where people could share their
motivations and connect with others taking part in the Challenge. Many chose
to upload their videos directly to Facebook where one can hear North American
languages like [Kwak'wala](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Kwak' data-
versionurl=) and [Lakota](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lakota_language), as
well as the [Miriwoong
language](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Miriwoong_language) from Australia,
for example.

Efforts to pinpoint the origin of this challenge are ongoing, but according to
the group administrator, one of the first participants was [James
Gensaw](https://www.facebook.com/video.php?v=581646501946653&fref=nf),
speaking words in the [Yurok
language](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Yurok_language).

Who are some of the participants? And why is this activity so important?
Colleen Fitzgerald, Director of the Native American Languages Lab at The
University of Texas at Arlington, [shares her thoughts on her blog post at the
Huffington Post](http://www.huffingtonpost.com/colleen-m-fitzgerald/the-
indigenous-language-c_b_5850364.html):

> Many of these videos come from adults who are second language learners. For
> many years, government-run boarding schools in both the U.S. and Canada took
> children from Native families. This had an immense effect on Native language
> acquisition. Children lost priceless years of daily home environments with
> parents and grandparents communicating to them in their language. Home is
> where children's language development thrives and grows, and where children
> acquire the many different speech forms that express the human experience.
> What gets lost? So much, from the everyday language of instructions, telling
> jokes, or a recipe, to the ritual language of prayers, ceremonial speeches,
> or sharing stories of the ancestors.

Here are two examples of participants in this Challenge, who uploaded their
videos to YouTube. Jackelyn Seitcher speaking in the [Nuu-chah-nulth
language](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Nuu-chah-nulth_language) shares words
after accepting the challenge.

Monica Peters takes the opportunity for the challenge to show the translations
of works in [Kanienkeha](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mohawk_language). She
then goes onto challenge members of the “[Keeping the Kanienkeha Language
Strong](https://www.facebook.com/groups/317531921639173/)” Facebook group,
community leaders and teachers, and students that are just starting out to
speak the language.

There are other videos collected on the blog[ News From Native
California](http://newsfromnativecalifornia.com/blog/native-language-
challenge/).

Konwennenhon Marion Delaronde also posted [her
video](https://www.facebook.com/video.php?v=10152239809236863&fref=nf) in the
group speaking Kanien'keha (Mohawk). After being challenged by Kehte Deer, she
enthusiastically took part and shared her reflections after uploading her
video:

> Already I think I heard all the languages from different nations. I have to
> tell you all that all your languages are so beautiful. Always speak your own
> languages if you can. It’s hopeful. I want to encourage all of you to
> continue to learn, continue to teach other and to really put your life into
> it, speaking. I’m so happy that I can speak Mohawk. I’m not fluent, a lot is
> still missing, but I want to thank everyone who has recorded themselves for
> this challenge, because you inspired me.

