Over the weekend at a prison in
[Kopeysk](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Kopeysk), just outside the city of
Chelyabinsk, roughly 250 inmates began a protest atop one of the complex's
buildings, waving
[banners](http://ic.pics.livejournal.com/drugoi/484155/7849302/7849302_original.jpg)
[ru] that begged “help us please” and complained of torture and extortion.
Penal Colony 6 (known simply as “shestyorka”) has a history of prison abuse,
and even Chelyabinsk Governor Mikhail Yurevich recently
[blamed](http://newsru.com/russia/26nov2012/kopeiskgub.html) [ru] the region's
prison system for causing “an enormous number of suicides.” Described in the
Russian media and blogosphere as a “bunt” (an uprising), Kopeysk's inmates
have by all accounts refrained from actual violence. Instead, they have merely
refused to come down from the roof of one of the prison's buildings. Many
inmates have also declared a hunger strike.

Blogging for the online project [Gulagu.net](http://gulagu.net/about/) [ru]
(“no to the Gulag”), Oksana Trufanova has reported from the ground in Kopeysk.
(Trufanova coordinates the Chelyabinsk chapter of “[Russkii
Verdikt](http://rusverdict.com/biography/),” a nationalist organization
dedicated to defending Russians charged with racist extremism.) Her [first
post](http://gulagu.net/profile/285/blog/568.html) [ru] about the prison
story, published November 24, has almost 900 comments at this moment. Since
then, Trufanova has documented skirmishes between anti-riot police and
prisoners’ relatives outside the prison gates. She herself [sustained an
injury](http://rusverdict.livejournal.com/217769.html) [ru] on Saturday,
claiming that guards attacked her and a group of other civilians without
provocation. Several videos circulating on YouTube (see below) feature men
with bleeding head wounds, apparently the result of clashes with law
enforcement, after venturing too close to the prison's entrance. In one video,
viewers can see a car with a window shield nearly smashed through by police
batons.

<http://youtu.be/iJ6-5QjNkgY>

LiveJournal user Oleg Lurie has blogged several times about the situation in
Kopeysk, also [posting](http://oleglurie-new.livejournal.com/65677.html) [ru]
YouTube interviews with three past prisoners, each of whom claims to have been
tortured during his incarceration in the Chelyabinsk oblast. Lurie has also
criticized the work of Alexey Sevastianov, the regional government's human
rights ombudsman. “Some ‘human rights defenders’ […] are trying to present
[these skirmishes between police and prisoners’ relatives] as the planned act
of malicious troublemakers,” Lurie complained on November 25.

Angering many, Sevastianov has
[endorsed](http://ria.ru/incidents/20121125/912125555.html) [ru] police
reports that the crowd outside the prison attacked guards with snowballs,
bottles, and iron pipes. Chelyabinsk's human rights czar also disappointed
many of the inmates’ supporters when he
[examined](http://newsru.com/russia/26nov2012/kopeiskgub.html) [ru] “Prisoner
Georgii D” (whose rumored beating was key in instigating the current unrest)
and declared that the inmate's body showed no signs of injury.

[![](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-content/uploads/2012/11/Screen-
Shot-2012-11-26-at-3.44.59-PM-288x300.png)](http://youtu.be/iJ6-5QjNkgY)

Screenshot of injured civilian outside Kopeysk prison gates, YouTube, video by
parvidos, 25 November 2012.

Russian Twitter users have adopted the hashtag
[#ИК6бунт](https://twitter.com/search?q=%23%D0%98%D0%9A6%D0%B1%D1%83%D0%BD%D1%82&src=hash)
(“penal colony 6 bunt”) to mark posts about the Kopeysk uprising. In Moscow, a
protest took place earlier today in support of the Chelyabinsk prisoners and
“against torture in Russian jails.” (On
[Facebook](https://www.facebook.com/events/371320892959015/) and
[VKontakte](http://vk.com/event46170020), roughly 175 people RSVP'd to
attend.) In advance of the demonstration, oppositionist Ilya Klishin [mused on
Facebook](https://www.facebook.com/ilya.klishin/posts/4569401847441) [ru]
about the story's media coverage:

> Обсуждения бунта в колонии Копейска (правильнее говорить акции
> неповиновения) обнажили ключевую, в общем-то, проблему. Мы остаемся
> кастовым, сословным, классовым обществом, наполовину архаичным, наполовину
> постмодернистским. И идея всеобщих гражданских прав для нас все еще остается
> революционной.

> The discussion about the bunt in the [prison] colony in Kopeysk (it's more
> accurate to call it an act of disobedience) has laid bare a rather key
> problem: we've remained a caste-, class- society, half archaic and half
> postmodern. And the idea of universal civil rights is still a revolutionary
> one for us.

[Writing on
Facebook](https://www.facebook.com/photo.php?fbid=454023947968248&set=a.173729369331042.29323.100000819417479&type=1&theater)
[ru], Grigory Melkonyants, the deputy director of Golos (an opposition-leaning
election-monitoring organization), published a [news
story](http://www.74.fsin.su/news/detail.php?ELEMENT_ID=60598) [ru] from the
Chelyabinsk prison system's website, announcing that Penal Colony 6 had
acquired a 3D flat screen television just days before the uprising. “This is
the f—ing end,” Melkonyants joked, before adding, “File this under ‘a parallel
reality.'”

While most reports now indicate that the crowd outside Penal Colony 6 has
dwindled, some relatives are trying — and occasionally succeeding — to
penetrate the prison walls. Identifying herself [to
journalists](http://newsru.com/russia/26nov2012/kopeiskgub.html) [ru] as a
sister of one of the protesting inmates, Olga Belousova is one example of
someone who snuck past guards and reached her brother inside. While this no
doubt was a great emotional high for the Belousovs, the fact that civilians
are indeed infiltrating the prison does complicate the narrative now popular
among netizens that despotic police are arbitrarily and unnecessarily using
violence against a law-abiding congregation of concerned kith and kin.

