In the International Museum of Women, the current online exhibit is all about
mothers. _[MAMA: Motherhood around the Globe](http://mama.imow.org/ "Mama:
motherhood around the globe exhibit")_ explores the different aspects of
motherhood through [video interviews](http://mama.imow.org/meetthemamas "Meet
the Mamas") to women in Nigeria, Kenya, Afghanistan, USA, Colombia, Hungary,
China and Norway.

[![Kenyan family](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2012/04/motherhood-family-
imow-375x281.jpg)](http://mama.imow.org/meetthemamas/meet-lusina)

Lusina from Kenya is one of the interviewed mothers for IMOW

[_Mama to Be_](http://mama.imow.org/mamatobe "Mama to Be section") is the
section on the expectations around motherhood and pregnancy, and how the
different women, some not even out of their teens reacted and faced their
impending motherhood.

> How many women in the world actually have an opportunity to decide if, how,
> and when to create a family? What are the reasons that women today are
> choosing – or refusing to choose – motherhood?

In [Healthy Mama, Healthy Baby](http://mama.imow.org/healthymamahealthybaby
"Healthy Mama, Healthy Baby"), the stories these women share on their birthing
experiences serve to illustrate how different cultures view birthing and
health.

> Every day, thousands of women worldwide give birth to new human life. While
> many of these women will have happy and successful deliveries, hundreds will
> die in childbirth. How do things like geography, income, and age affect your
> chances of a safe delivery? What is being done to improve upon the world’s
> maternal mortality rate, and how can you get involved?

In the[ Featured Voices section]( http://mama.imow.org/yourvoices/11 "Featured
Voices"), stories were submitted by the audience and six stories were selected
by an international jury for the Community Choice Awards. One of them is this
excerpt of the hard situation in the Colombian hospital maternity wards by
Jorge Caballero for Gusano Films.

In [_Birth Journal Maternity Excerpt_](http://mama.imow.org/yourvoices/birth-
journal-maternity-excerpt "Birth Journal Maternity Excerpt by Jorge
Caballero"), a mother of six arrives to a checkup and then to deliver a baby.
During the checkup, her story comes out through the questions asked by the
doctor, and his attitude towards her changes, ending up with a suggestion for
a tubal ligation and a curt farewell. During delivery, there isn't even time
to move the lone woman to the gurney and into the maternity room, she gives
birth on her hospital bed.

One-on-one interviews in [Meet the Mamas](http://mama.imow.org/meetthemamas
"Meet the Mamas") focus the conversations around the woman and her personal
story, for example, it helps contrast the different situations between a [teen
mother in Liberia](http://mama.imow.org/meetthemamas/meet-winnie "Winnie in
Liberia teen mother"), living what she calls in Critical Condition, and a
[teen mother in the United States](http://mama.imow.org/meetthemamas/meet-
stephanie "Stephanie in the USA, teen mother interview"), who through family
support is able to move on ahead and continue her studies.

This exhibit in the International Museum of Women aims to get more people
informed on the state of Women's Maternal Health, on their [Get Involved
page](http://mama.imow.org/getinvolved "Get Involved with IMOW") they suggest
different ways in which readers can participate in improving the statistics
and raise awareness themselves on these important issues.

