No one could have predicted that a post on [Chinese ant
farmers](https://www.globalvoicesonline.org/2007/11/20/china-bankrupt-ant-
farmers-prepare-to-protest/) would become the most read story on Global Voices
in 2007.

The top stories on this website were primarily those where local bloggers
became important sources for the international media (and democracy
activists), like protests in
[Myanmar](https://www.globalvoicesonline.org/2007/10/15/special-coverage-
burmese-protests-2007/),
[Pakistan](https://www.globalvoicesonline.org/specialcoverage/the-
assassination-of-benazir-bhutto/), and the current [unrest in
Kenya](https://www.globalvoicesonline.org/2008/01/03/kenya-is-ugandan-militia-
in-kenya/). Or they attracted droves of readers because almost no one else
reports on “faraway” regions and stories like the tropical storms in
[Barbados, Dominica](https://www.globalvoicesonline.org/2007/08/16/barbados-
dominica-hurricane-dean/), [Jamaica, Cayman
Islands](https://www.globalvoicesonline.org/2007/08/21/jamaica-cayman-islands-
after-hurricane-dean/),
[Honduras](https://www.globalvoicesonline.org/2007/09/04/honduras-hurricane-
felix-creates-a-blogstorm/), and
[Oman](https://www.globalvoicesonline.org/2007/06/05/oman-tropical-cyclone-
gonu-hits-oman/).

In the past days, Global Voices authors and editors have highlighted some of
the top stories in blogospheres of their different regions. See what bloggers
in the [Americas](https://www.globalvoicesonline.org/2008/01/03/americas-a-
look-back-at-global-voices-part-i/), the
[Caribbean](https://www.globalvoicesonline.org/2008/01/03/caribbean-2007-the-
year-of-elections/), the
[Caucasus](https://www.globalvoicesonline.org/2007/12/31/caucasus-2007-blog-
review/), [Hong Kong](https://www.globalvoicesonline.org/2007/12/31/hong-kong-
top-ten-in-blogosphere-2007/),
[Korea](https://www.globalvoicesonline.org/2008/01/01/korea-top-ten-news-
in-2007/), and [the
Philippines](https://www.globalvoicesonline.org/2008/01/02/philippines-
bloggers-look-back-to-2007/) felt were the most important issues in 2007 – and
share in hopes for the future with
[Syrian](https://www.globalvoicesonline.org/2008/01/03/syria-bloggers-new-
year/), [Morrocan](https://www.globalvoicesonline.org/2008/01/03/morocco-
happy-new-year/),
[Arabic](https://www.globalvoicesonline.org/2008/01/03/arabeyes-have-a-
spectacular-new-year/) and [ Portuguese-
language](https://www.globalvoicesonline.org/2007/12/31/lusosphere-wishes-and-
hopes-for-2008/) bloggers.

**‘Sexiest’ stories on Global Voices in 2007**

Quantity isn't always a measure of quality, but here's a quick look at some
more of the most read posts on Global Voices in 2007.

[![](https://www.globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2007/11/ziyouzg2.jpg)  
](https://www.globalvoicesonline.org/2007/11/20/china-bankrupt-ant-farmers-
prepare-to-protest/)_(Bankrupt ant farmers protesting in Shenyang, photo from
“The Free China”)_

Several top posts were originally published on our
[Advocacy](https://advocacy.globalvoicesonline.org) website about online
censorship and freedom of expression. The enormous popularity of posts like
those on [Chinese ant farmers
](https://www.globalvoicesonline.org/2007/11/20/china-bankrupt-ant-farmers-
prepare-to-protest/)or [environmental protests in
Xiamen](https://www.globalvoicesonline.org/2007/06/01/china-liveblogging-from-
ground-zero/) were surely linked to the fact that local internet media and
blogs were censored.

It doesn't have to ‘bleed’ to lead on Global Voices, but it seems to help.
Traffic on posts about the [execution of Saddam
Hussein](https://www.globalvoicesonline.org/2007/01/06/saddam-execution-video-
re-ignites-death-penalty-debates-worldwide/), an honor killing [in Southern
Kurdistan](https://www.globalvoicesonline.org/2007/05/16/kurdistance-the-
honor-killing-of-dua/), and a neo-Nazi execution video [in
Russia](https://www.globalvoicesonline.org/2007/08/18/russia-neo-nazi-
execution-video/) were all high.

Sex and scandal also never fails to attract online readers (do we need a sex
editor?). Among the most salacious stories in 2007, were a US hip hop artist's
gyrations [in
Trinidad](https://www.globalvoicesonline.org/2007/04/30/trinidad-tobago-akon-
controversy-continues/), a polygamous holy man [in
Indonesia](https://www.globalvoicesonline.org/2007/04/30/trinidad-tobago-akon-
controversy-continues/), sexual expression [in Hong
Kong](https://www.globalvoicesonline.org/2007/05/11/hong-kong-guilty-for-
hyperlink-and-for-sex-talk/), and most recently, the infidelities of [a
Chinese television host](https://www.globalvoicesonline.org/2007/12/29/china-
official-olympics-channels-unveiling-ceremony-crashed/).

**Global Voices in 2008**

Global Voices’ daily readership has doubled since the beginning of 2007, and
quite atypically for an English-language website, China is the country we
receive the most readers from after the United States.

In 2008, we expect to attract even more readers from non-English speaking
countries with the help of our incredible [Lingua
translators](https://globalvoicesonline.org/translations/) who now translate
Global Voices post into a dozen languages, including Arabic, Bangla, and
Malagasy. They have grown to become one of the biggest volunteer translating
communities on the web.

International mainstream media are asking questions about world bloggers like
never before. Global Voices authors and editors are currently being
[interviewed and quoted](https://globalvoicesonline.org/about/media-archive/)
on citizen media and politics almost weekly in newspapers, magazines, radio
and television. Our new [Special Coverage
pages](https://www.globalvoicesonline.org/specialcoverage/) with live feeds
from hand-picked blogs have been linked to by a wide array of online media.

Finally, Global Voices [regional and language
editors](https://globalvoicesonline.org/about/#GVTeam) will be reaching out to
more bloggers in countries we do not currently cover, inviting them to join
our network of more than 100 volunteer authors (send them an email if you
think it should be you!). From October to January the number of posts by our
authors write rose by 20%.

**New projects on the horizon**

Our [Rising Voices](https://rising.globalvoicesonline.org) initiative has just
awarded micro-grants to [five new blogging
projects](https://www.globalvoicesonline.org/2007/12/28/congratulations-new-
rising-voices/) in Jamaica, Kenya, Iran, Madagascar, and Uruguay, following
the success of the first round of grantees in
[Bangladesh](https://rising.globalvoicesonline.org/projects/nari-jibon-
project/), [Bolivia](https://rising.globalvoicesonline.org/projects/voces-
bolivianas/),
[Colombia](https://rising.globalvoicesonline.org/projects/hiperbarrio/),
[India](https://rising.globalvoicesonline.org/projects/neighbourhood-
diaries/), and [Sierra
Leone](https://rising.globalvoicesonline.org/projects/think-build-change-
salone/).

With support from Reuters, Global Voices has named an environmental editor,
[Juliana Rotich](https://www.globalvoicesonline.org/author/afromusing/), and a
new video editor, [Juliana Rincón
Parra](https://www.globalvoicesonline.org/author/juliana-rincon-parra/) (being
named Juliana was not a requirement for the job). These two editors will be
expanding our coverage on both subjects worldwide.

Global Voices will also be partnering with Reuters on a project to report on
what the global blogosphere is saying about the US presidential election.

These are just some of the exciting initiatives coming out of the Global
Voices community in 2008. Happy new year to all our readers, bloggers,
translators, innovators, and supporters.

