The television channel [Radio Caracas Television
(RCTV)](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/RCTV) has enjoyed the ability to transmit
over an open television frequency for the past 53 years. It is the oldest
television channel in the country, and its license for the use of the
frequency will expire. The Venezuelan government decided not to renew the
license, [just as we have written in the
past](https://www.globalvoicesonline.org/2007/01/26/chavez-plans-to-revoke-
stations-broadcast-license-in-venezuela/).

The debate in the country continues to be the same: on one side the opposition
to the Chavez government considers that this has to do with political
retaliation in punishment for the channel's role of political opposition, and
on the other hand, the Chavistas support the measure because it can now
“liberate” the open television signal from a channel that has destabilized the
country through its propaganda.

There is very little gray area in a situation so polarzied, but the best thing
is to read both sides.

The Venezuelan blog directory _[To2blogs.com](http://www.to2blogs.com/)_
opened [a special section about RCTV](http://www.to2blogs.com/tag/rctv?page=1)
and is collecting all of the posts that the Venezuelan bloggers are writing
about the subject. This tells us about the importance of this governmental
action in the morale of the Venezuelan blogosphere, because in itself, the
process is another opportunity for political confrontation, as we have become
accustomed to. Blogs have been created especially about the topic, those that
are in favor the measure ([ _RCTV from the
inside_](http://rctvdesdeadentro.blogspot.com/)) or against it ([ _I am with
RCTV_](http://rctv7.blogspot.com/)).

Up until now, there are more than 2,000 articles just in that site alone.
There is a wealth of opinions about this conflict.

**A channel without signal is a closed channel?**

Within the political correctness language, “the non-renewal of the channel's
license” means that it cannot transmit over open signal, which will affect the
channel's economic standing and also the viewers will not be able to see it.
The channel will not close, but it is restricted to transmit over cable, but
because there is also no Digital TV technology in Venezuela, it ends this
discussion.

**Freedom of speech, public or private**

The internal debates within each blog, such as the one at _Slave to the PC
[ES]_ [with more than 200
comments](http://slavetothepc.wordpress.com/2007/02/07/una-pregunta-
sencilla-%c2%bfque-dice-la-blogosfera-de-la-no-renovacion-de-la-concesion-a-
rctv/), center upon whether the measure against the private channel represents
a violation of freedom of speech.

Kira Kariakin [comments](http://www.k-minos.com/?p=435):

> Para mí la cuestión radica en los principios que mueven una sociedad que se
> precie de democrática y en esos principios están incluidos no solo la
> libertad de expresión, sino el derecho a la disensión, al juicio justo, a la
> defensa, a la protesta, al trabajo, a la propiedad privada, entre tantos
> otros que con este retiro de la concesión de la señal para RCTV se
> violentan. Luego de sentado un precedente como éste no habrá marcha atrás en
> cuanto a la libertad de expresión en los medios.

For me, the question is based on the principles of a society that enjoys
democracy, and within those principles they also include not only freedom of
speech, but also the right to dissent, to a fair trial, to a defense, to
protest, to work, to private property, among others, which are some of the
ones that are threatened with the withdrawal of RCTV's license. After a
precedent is set like this there is no turning back in regards to the media's
freedom of speech.

Iria at _Resteados [ES]_ [criticizes the quality of the channel
](http://resteados.blogsome.com/2007/05/15/yo-no-estoy-con-rctv/)and thinks
that the problem of freedom of speech goes beyond whether or not it stays on
the air:

> RCTV sigue siendo hoy, el canal que hace 12 años dejé de ver por razones
> éticas y estéticas. No ha cambiado en estos meses desde que Chávez le dictó
> la sentencia de cierre.
>
> Así que no tengo más que repetir: “Yo no estoy con RCTV”.

RCTV continues to be the channel that I stopped watching 12 years ago for
ethical and aesthetic reasons. It has not changed during the months that
Chavez gave its sentence of closing.

