These last two weeks have seen fairly good amount of activity in the
[Hindi](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hindi) Blogosphere. With the political &
other elections season coming up, its hard to ignore it & the resulting
activity. So while Rachna composed [a poem on
elections](http://rachanabajaj.wordpress.com/2007/01/09/chunaav/) describing
how the environment would be in a village and Eswami is also not far behind in
expressing his thoughts on [Hillary and
Presidentship](http://hindini.com/eswami/?p=116). And elections is not all
thats in for political scene. It very much has its ugly side as well, like how
[terrorists in Assam shot labourers from
Bihar](http://www.jitu.info/merapanna/?p=641) just because they are not
natives and according to them [Assam](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Assam)
belongs only to the Assamese and no outsider is allowed to come there. The
point those terrorists are making is that Assam is an independent region under
opression of India, its just like the age-long Kashmir situation where
terrorists funded by the western neighbour plunder killing one and all who do
not agree with their fanatical beliefs.

Further elaborating on the Assam problem, Jitu writes that maybe this problem
is arising because of [regional divide](http://www.jitu.info/merapanna/?p=642)
as people are putting themselves and their region before the interests of the
country. And that is being seeded and fueled by the Ulfa Terrorists whose
leader is in the safe Bangladeshi haven while his troops march around in Assam
dictating their terms. And the political leaders are doing nothing because
they are concerned more with their votebank in form of illegal Bangladeshi
immigrants who illegally cross the borders and settle in Assam and
neighbouring states, the local politicians(for their own gain) furnish them
with false ids and papers which declare them as citizens of India and thus
allowing them to cast their votes to form the government.

And as per [Himanshu](http://www.jitu.info/merapanna/?p=642#comment-94972),
India has been fighting the islamic terrorists till now and from now on it'll
have to fight off Christian Terrorists as well which are starting to crawl out
from under their rocks in the eastern states of India while [Srijan
Shilpi](http://srijanshilpi.com/?p=85) is also pondering on what can be the
solution for this Assam issue. However, all this is sponsored terrorism,
whether its funded by an enemy country or the local politicians. Else what
will [burning of shops and vehicles in Bangluroo(erstwhile
Bangalore)](http://www.tarakash.com/mantavya/2007/01/blog-post_22.html) will
be called, an action which some followers of islam executed in _supposed_
opposition to execution of Saddam!

Someone with some sense would be clearly able to see that all this is nothing
but attempts to create anarchy by anti-social elements as opposing by burning
property of fellow citizens would not bring a dead man to life. However
[Srijan Shilpi](http://srijanshilpi.com/?p=81) brought some good news in the
form of the recent ruling of Supreme Court of India where the judiciary bench
passed a ruling due to which the state assemblies will no longer be able to
keep any of their decisions out of reach of judicial evalution, something
which they did now and then as the constitution had given them the right to do
so, which resulted in many unfair and unpleasant laws made and imposed on
people by their state assemblies and no one was able to challenge them.

Moving on from politics, another draw for most people is investments, be it in
a company's stocks or in real-estate or any other lucrative avaenue. So
keeping that in mind, Jitu generously told everyone about the [two lucrative
real-estate deals](http://www.jitu.info/merapanna/?p=640) that are in the
market, the Castle Dracula in Romania and if you want, an island country
called Sealand is also for sale! ;)

[![](http://farm1.static.flickr.com/123/356928278_fad3886779_m.jpg)](http://www.flickr.com/photos/amit_gupta/356928278/
"We will be happy to talk to you in Hindi")Another thing that I'm sure a lot
of Indians(especially Hindi speaking ones) resent is why are they addressed
and spoken to in English when both them and the person talking to them knows
perfect Hindi. This kind of thing can be seen in a lot of upscale restaurants
and hotels etc. but I was quite pleased to see the sign of “[ _We will be
happy to talk to you in Hindi_](http://www.amitgupta.in/2007/01/14/pleased-to-
talk-in-hindi/)” in a cafe in [Connaught
Place](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Connaught_Place,_New_Delhi) last week.
Eswami told everyone about this [new gadget in
market](http://hindini.com/hindini/?p=135) which will easily convert your old
music cassettes to MP3 format for easy listening on computer or MP3 players.
Not far behind, Unmukt suprised everyone by blogging that [Linux users are
more sexy and sensitive](http://unmukt-hindi.blogspot.com/2007/01/blog-
post_11.html) than other operating system users. I'm sure that a lot of
Windows and Mac users will refute this claim which appear to be baseless. ;)

Fresh from the recently accomplished Hindi Blogger of 2006 competition,
[Tarakash](http://www.tarakash.com/) team is at it again, this time they are
going to start the [Best Hindi Blog
Post](http://www.tarakash.com/joglikhi/?p=132) competition which will select
the best blog post written in Hindi every two months. These people are really
pushing it in style now, and these small incentives will definitely encourage
more people to blogging and push existing hindi bloggers to write more and
better, hats off to Tarakash team.

GK Awadhiya's narration of
[_Mahabharat_](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mahabharat) continues as [Arjun
returns after getting divine weapons from
heaven](http://sukhsagarse.blogspot.com/2007/01/blog-post_20.html) and eldest
_Pandav_ [Yudhishtra saves his cousin(and enemy) Duryodhana's
life](http://sukhsagarse.blogspot.com/2007/01/blog-post_21.html).

Links courtsey: [_Narad_](http://narad.akshargram.com/)

