In the streets of [Monterrey](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Monterrey), a city
best known for being the industrial and technological mecca of Mexico,
graffiti and many other forms of urban artistic expression are growing.
Hundreds of street artists are active in the metropolitan area of this state
capital located in the northeastern part of the country. In synergy with its
development and prestige in the field of technology, as it was the first
Mexican city with internet during the late 1980s, these artists have started
to utilize user-friendly electronic media in order to showcase their painted
works and murals on the internet. With sites like YouTube, Flickr, Fotolog,
and blogs, artists are finding ways to share their works with the world.

Many of these electronic sites are free and easy to use, making the cost and
effort investment minimal. Artists are using these sites to document their
works, promote upcoming events, and make connections with other artists. Since
many of their street works are illegal – painting on public walls – anonymity
and the use of pseudonyms save them from the consequences from the local
authorities. For example, the graffiti artist Buster publishes his videos on
YouTube about the way he makes this illegal tagging on the cement walls of
certain major avenues and multi-story buildings as part of a series of videos
called “The Wild Street.” The fans of this risk-taking graffiti artist also
[upload their tributes and
homages](http://www.youtube.com/results?search_query=buster+graffiti) to
Buster on YouTube

For some artists, the process of painting a mural is almost as important as
the mural itself. There are hundreds of videos available on YouTube, including
a video, which is uploaded and constantly deleted from the web for different
reasons, of a “[graffiti attack](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=2cWLq5mET_4)”
where dozens of teenagers organize to paint an underpass along the Alfonso
Reyes avenue. To paint in such an exposed location without being arrested
while paradoxically they are openly showing off on the Internet takes courage
equivalent to a feat in an extreme sport.

On [Flickr](http://www.flickr.com), one can find photos of works in progress.
During the citywide art event “Campeones” that took place in mid-2008, the
artists [Fidencio](http://www.flickr.com/photos/fidencioconstantino),
[Screw](http://www.flickr.com/photos/art_screw),
[Blast](http://www.flickr.com/photos/blastone) (all three from Monterrey),
[Blair](http://www.myspace.com/sesoh254) (from California) and
[Eltono](http://www.eltono.com) (renowned French urban artist) came together
to paint a giant whale with some wood panels on the wall of a parking lot. The
images found on Flickr with [a search for the words “mural” and
“campeones”](http://www.flickr.com/search/?q=mural+campeones) taken by the
artists, as well as spectators who watched the painting, provides a visual
narration and illustrates step-by-step the transformation of the large,
previously abandoned wall to become an alternative tourist attraction.

[![Photo by Cambalache and used under a Creative Commons
license](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2009/02/whale.jpg)](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2009/02/whale.jpg)

Photo by Cambalache and used under a Creative Commons license

On an individual level, these electronic sites serve as a type of portfolio.
The collective Los Contratistas use [their blog
[es]](http://loscontratistas.wordpress.com) to publish recent works, discuss
upcoming events, document past activities, present their project invitees, and
share a bit of their philosophy.

One person who is part of this collective is the artist known as Fidencio, for
his use of the child “saint” Fidencio of El Espinazo, Nuevo León, in his
posters and stencils. Sometimes [he also includes his
](http://www.flickr.com/photos/lap0la/2827430102/in/set-72157607101274946)[blog's
address [es]](http://fidencio.wordpress.com) in some of the street
appearances. His blog address is his business card for his work, a link of the
physical world to the virtual world.

In addition to providing coverage of the work of these urban artists, social
media is also important for establishing connection points and for other
supporters, especially shops that are directly linked to the gangs, “crews,”
or collectives. For example, [Streetarte [es]](http://www.streetarte.com),
located in a very busy shopping center in central Monterrey is dedicated to
the art of airbrushing and graffiti. They take orders to airbrush images on
t-shirts, caps and other items. They use their website and their
[Fotolog](http://www.fotolog.com/streetarte), another image hosting service,
to showcase their items for sale and as a portfolio for the artists that work
there.

On their [YouTube channel](http://www.youtube.com/profile?user=streetarte1),
they publish videos of those graffiti artists working live, without revealing
their faces:

On the same channel, they also add original content of interest to the hip-hop
community, which is closely tied to the culture of graffiti. They publish
video of conversations with local rappers, such as
[Güero](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=VS9le1ehnzw), national rappers, such as
Serko Fu and [Caballeros del Plan
G](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=MnWlLVZr7cI), as well as international
artists such as the Spanish rappers [Violadores del
Verso](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=O31O6a-V3Xc) improvising rhymes or
“beatboxing.”

These urban artists are making great use of citizen media to promote and share
their work. The state of Nuevo León, of which Monterrey is the capital, is the
Mexican state with the most users of Fotolog. A mash-up map was recently
created to link photographs found on Flickr and Fotolog of murals and other
urban art with their corresponding location on a Google map. The result is a
map of the metropolitan area of Monterrey showing different locations of
murals, graffiti tags, stencil works, or stickers:

  
[Ver mapa más
grande](http://maps.google.com/maps/ms?ie=UTF8&hl=es&t=k&source=embed&msa=0&msid=112331844251166813506.0004620a656ff0106a9fa&ll=25.671313,-100.309038&spn=0.034347,0.070038)

To date, there are more than 50 works from artists, via this map, can be
integrated without problems to the service of Google Earth. For artists and
collectives, these social media sites are becoming a very powerful tool. They
have the best of both worlds: an international reach with little effort and
little cost, as well as distancing themselves to protect their identity. The
pseudonyms that they use when they sign their names in the form of “tags” in
the street represent their usernames on the internet, known by their friends
but out of reach of the authorities.

