![](https://globalvoices.org/wp-
content/uploads/2019/07/sudan_remix-800x434.png)

Photos (clockwise from left): Sudanese protestors in April 2019 by [M.
Saleh](https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Sudanese_protestors_chanting.jpg)
(CC BY-SA 4.0); map highlighting Saudi Arabia in green and Sudan in orange by
[PlanespotterA320](https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Saudi_Arabia_Sudan_Locator_\(cropped\).png)
(Public domain via Wikimedia Commons); Sudanese President Omar al-Bashir and
King Abdulla of Saudi Arabia attend the opening session of the Arab Summit in
Qatar (by [Tribes of the
World](https://www.flickr.com/photos/92278137@N04/9195805908) (CC BY-SA 2.0).

**By Mohamed Suliman**

On June 3, 2019, thousands of Sudanese protesters continued pro-democracy
protests demanding civilian rule in Sudan, armed with nothing but peaceful
disobedience. In contrast, the Rapid Support Forces (RSF), acting on behalf of
the Transitional Military Council (TMC) temporarily in charge of Sudan, were
ready to shoot and kill on that fateful.

Around the same time that month, [the United States Senate voted to block
sending $8 million worth of arms to Saudi
Arabia](https://www.axios.com/senate-votes-block-saudi-arm-sales-trump-
veto-4db48733-32c8-4d0d-8db3-68356fccf62e.html)—a block US President Donald
Trump has said he intends to
[veto](https://www.defensenews.com/congress/2019/06/20/us-senate-votes-to-
kill-saudi-arms-sales-defying-trump-veto-threat/).

Saudi Arabia strongly supports the RSF. RSF leader Mohamed Daglo is a trusted
friend and an ally of Saudi Arabia. In May 2019, [Daglo met with the Saudi
crown prince Mohammed bin Salman](https://www.thenational.ae/world/mena/sudan-
s-military-leadership-pledges-to-back-saudi-arabia-against-iran-
threats-1.866068) and assured him of continued cooperation with Saudi Arabia
in their ongoing war in Yemen.

The Saudis supply RSF with money and arms, so when the US supports arms deals
with Saudi Arabia they’re essentially supporting RSF as well. Saudi Arabia, a
strategic ally of the US in the region, has tried to secure gains at the cost
of the Sudanese people’s dream.

The Sudanese revolution broke out in December 2018 under the banner of “Fall,
That’s All!”. Sudanese citizens demanded the ouster of President Omar Bashir
and his regime, which had held power for over 30 years. In mid-April 2019,
Bashir was ousted and the TMC took over as Sudan’s de-facto leaders.

On June 3, 2019, the RSF used brutal force to disperse peaceful protesters
holding a sit-in and calling for democratic and civilian-led government in
Sudan. Initial reports on this massacre confirmed that at least [100 people
were shot to death](https://www.cnn.com/2019/06/05/africa/sudan-death-toll-
intl/index.html?fbclid=IwAR1uGSXfT7UeNb_OLBSH4PyGGnjQENRD1Qy_LZlaHKgjNh5zed1nB0V7E-0),
their bodies thrown into the Nile river, and [women were raped in the
streets](https://www.theguardian.com/world/2019/jun/04/sudans-military-
council-calls-for-snap-elections-in-wake-of-deadly-protests).

In an attempt to obscure their crimes, the RSF and the TMC shut down the
[internet across the
country](https://www.internetsociety.org/news/statements/2019/turn-the-
internet-back-on-in-sudan-and-keep-it-on/).

The RSF is made up of members from the notorious “Janjaweed,” well known for
their role in atrocities committed in Darfur. International rights
organizations have issued several reports about their heinous crimes,
including “[Men With No
Mercy](https://www.hrw.org/sites/default/files/report_pdf/sudan0915_insert_lowres_with_cover.pdf),”
by Human Rights Watch. HRW also placed RSF leader Daglo [on the “partial list
of individuals who should be investigated by the
ICC](https://www.hrw.org/sites/default/files/reports/darfur1205webwcover.pdf).”

In addition to supporting Sudan’s RSF, Saudi Arabia is also involved in an
ongoing war in neighboring Yemen. In 2015, they[ launched a military
intervention](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Saudi_Arabian-
led_intervention_in_Yemen) there to support the government in its attacks
against Houthi rebel groups. The Saudi-backed coalition is made up of [nine
countries from the Middle East and
Africa](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Saudi_Arabian-
led_intervention_in_Yemen), including Sudan, with RSF as an outspoken ally.

Many human rights groups have condemned and criticized the [war in
Yemen](https://www.vox.com/2019/1/30/18203857/yemen-war-deaths-injured-chart-
intelligence) for ongoing human rights violations, with 14 million people at
risk of starvation. Since 2018, [6,872 civilians had been killed and 10,768
wounded](https://www.hrw.org/world-report/2019/country-chapters/yemen),
primarily by Saudi-led coalition airstrikes, [according to the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights](https://www.ohchr.org/EN/NewsEvents/Pages/DisplayNews.aspx?NewsID=23855&LangID=E).

It is no secret that Sudan’s [RSF is recruiting child soldiers to fight in the
Yemen war](https://www.nytimes.com/2018/12/28/world/africa/saudi-sudan-yemen-
child-fighters.html). Daglo assured the Saudi Arabia that Sudanese forces
would remain in Yemen to defend the security of Saudi Arabia.

American arms are now in the hands of Saudi crown prince Mohamed bin Salman,
who not only orders the killing and torture of journalists such as [Jamal
Khashoggi](https://www.bbc.com/news/world-europe-45812399), and also fully
supports a Daglo and his militia who kill protesters, rape women and recruits
children as soldiers.

As a Sudanese citizen, I find it really embarrassing that a great nation like
the US—that has been built on the principles of freedom and justice for
all—keeps sending arms to Saudi Arabia.

I, for one, stand with all the ongoing efforts in the US at all levels to put
a halt to the selling of American weapons to Saudi Arabia. This is both a
moral and practical stance American people should take in order to maintain
their long-term interests with regard to Sudanese citizens.

I have two wishes: That no new massacre will occur in Sudan; and that the US
will stop sending arms to Saudis who protect and support a war criminal who
will likely prevent my first wish from coming true.

**[_Mohamed Suliman_](https://twitter.com/MuhammedKambal) _is a Sudanese
citizen living in the U.S. He was one of the coordinators of a_[ _campaign
that changed the US tech sanctions policy on
Sudan_](https://www.indexoncensorship.org/2014/01/sudanese-civil-society-
calls-change-us-digital-technology-sanctions/) _, and now tracks_[ _Chinese
companies that export tear gas_](https://qz.com/africa/1624385/sudans-
uprising-protesters-are-victims-of-tear-gas-abuse/) _to the Sudanese regime.
He also coordinating_[ _a project to remove the RSF content from the
Internet_](https://www.npr.org/2019/06/26/735883899/why-facebook-wont-kick-
off-a-warlord)** _ **.** _

