[![](https://pt.globalvoices.org/wp-
content/uploads/2018/06/photo_2018-06-20_14-30-34.jpg)](https://pt.globalvoices.org/wp-
content/uploads/2018/06/photo_2018-06-20_14-30-34.jpg)

Image of houses destroyed by fire during attacks. Photo by Borges Nhamire,
used with permission.

Since October 2017, an unknown armed group has been [terrorizing the north of
Mozambique](https://pt.globalvoices.org/2018/07/06/riquezas-naturais-cercadas-
pelo-terror-o-que-explica-os-ataques-no-norte-de-mocambique/) with rogue
attacks that have left over [200
dead](https://pt.globalvoices.org/2018/07/06/riquezas-naturais-cercadas-pelo-
terror-o-que-explica-os-ataques-no-norte-de-mocambique/) and many villages
destroyed.

The attacks occur mostly at night and in the early morning in remote parts of
Cabo Delgado province, near the border with Tanzania. Armed with guns and
machetes, group members invade a village, shoot and decapitate people, set
fire to houses, steal food, and run away to the nearby forest.

As Mozambican authorities struggle to uncover the origins and motivations of
the group, local newspaper Carta de Moçambique (letter from Mozambique in
Portuguese)
[revealed](https://cartamz.com/index.php/politica/item/425-shakira-lecticia-e-
os-seus-amigos-do-facebook-conspiracao-ou-diversao) in December 2018 that a
Facebook account using a fictitious name might have helped attract and groom
members of the mysterious gang.

Under the name Shakira Júnior Lectícia, the profile was active for 14 months
starting on 25 October 2017. During this period, it posted messages praising
the attacks in Cabo Delgado and called on youths to join the group with
promises of large sums of money. The account claims that Shakira Júnior
Lectícia is a resident of Expansão neighborhood, in the city of Pemba, the
capital of Cabo Delgado.

Eventually, the account was shut down — it has been inaccessible since
December 10, 2018. At that time, it had reached Facebook's limit of 5,000
friends and amassed hundreds of followers.

The account's profile photo, along with several images it published over the
past year, were taken from people that say they are not involved with the
attackers in Cabo Delgado, according to Carta de Moçambique's story. Those
photos usually depicted people holding handfuls of meticais, Mozambique's
currency.

Carta de Moçambique reporters tracked down four people whose photos had been
posted by the account, including the legitimate owner of the profile photo.
They have all confirmed that the pictures are of them and that they have never
had any contact with the account. None knew how the account administrators
obtained the photos.

![](https://pt.globalvoices.org/wp-
content/uploads/2018/12/photo_2018-12-14_17-02-53-224x400.jpg)

Photos by Shakira posted on Facebook. Screengrab by MediaFax.

All four people interviewed by the publication have ties to Cabo Delgado. Some
live in the province, including in districts under attack. Others live just
outside Cabo Delgado.

According to Carta de Moçambique, which monitored the account’s activity, on
11 and 22 November 2018, Shakira published photos of a young man holding
several metical bills, with a caption implying that he received the money as a
reward for having joined the insurgency.

An [attack in Pundanhar district ](https://observador.pt/2018/11/12/seis-
pessoas-encontradas-mortas-no-meio-do-mato-no-norte-de-mocambique/)on November
11 resulted in the death of six men. Their bodies were found in a forest with
signs of attack by machetes.

Shakira posted a photo just hours after the attack, before Mozambique's media
outlets had reported on it, which raised further suspicion.

Mozambique’s National Department of Criminal Investigation is investigating
the case.

Authorities have [charged 189
people](https://noticias.sapo.mz/sociedade/artigos/tribunal-de-cabo-delgado-
julga-189-pessoas-acusadas-de-ligacao-a-ataques-armados) in connection with
the attacks so far. A trial that began in October 2018 is expected to reach a
verdict in early 2019, according to the local press.

The defendants include nationals from Mozambique as well as of Tanzania,
Somalia, Burundi and the Democratic Republic of the Congo. They are 42 women
and 147 men.

Police often conduct operations in the area and regularly detain people
suspected to have links with the violence. They have returned many young men
to their families after arresting them while they are on route to the affected
districts. Police [says](https://sicnoticias.sapo.pt/mundo/2018-06-08-Jovens-
aliciados-para-se-juntarem-a-grupos-armados-no-norte-de-Mocambique) agents
groom them with promises of employment and money.

### Group's origins remain a mystery

It remains inconclusive how the attacks in Cabo Delgado are funded, the types
of training used, and the real interests of the attackers.

Although there have been strong suspicions of faith-based terrorism, so far
this is speculative. A [video](https://rr.sapo.pt/video/163090/alegado-video-
de-recrutamento-de-um-grupo-terrorista-islamico-em-mocambique) that was widely
shared on social media, including on
[Facebook](https://www.facebook.com/195775574644629/videos/710122526036763/?permPage=1),
on January 2018, helped fuel such theories.

Recorded in a forest, it shows a group of five men wearing civilian clothing
and headscarves, handling machine guns, and a man holding a machete. Speaking
in Portuguese, the man praises the attack in Mocímboa da Praia (where several
people were killed in late 2017) and calls on Mozambicans to join the group.

The majority of Mozambique’s population is Christian, with around 18 percent
identifying as Muslim. Most of Mozambican Muslims live in the northern part of
the country.

A
[study](http://www.open.ac.uk/technology/mozambique/sites/www.open.ac.uk.technology.mozambique/files/files/Moci%CC%81mboa%20da%20Praia.pdf)
published in May 2018 by researchers from the Institute of Social and Economic
Studies (IESE) and the Civil Society Support Mechanism Foundation (MASC)
suggests a different theory.

After interviewing several stakeholders in the affected districts, it
concluded that the group's objective is economical: it aims to create
opportunities for the marginalized youth to gain from trafficking wood, ivory,
charcoal, and rubies in the resource-rich province.

Cabo Delgado is home to the 40 percent of the world’s known ruby reserves and
has enough gas and oil to turn Mozambique into the third largest
[exporter](http://allafrica.com/stories/201703150537.html) of natural gas in
the world after Qatar and Australia starting 2022.

However, its population remains impoverished, with 24 percent of people aged
15-24 currently unemployed,[ according to government
data](http://www.mitess.gov.mz/sites/default/files/documents/files/Boletim%20I%20Trimestre%202016%20%20%20COMPLETO.pdf).

