![](https://globalvoices.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/02/DoingCelebration2.jpg)

Doing Cafe, a feminist cafe in Seoul, opened a year ago in March. In that
time, over 10,000 people have passed through — most of them women in their 20s
and 30s. It's the first place like it in South Korea, according to owner Kim
Ryeo-il. Recently, the cafe held its first birthday party, which drew over 50
of its supporters. Credit: Ann Babe/PRI

_This story by[Ann Babe](https://www.pri.org/people/ann-babe) for GlobalPost
originally[ ](http://www.pri.org/people/meradith-hoddinott)[appeared on
PRI.org](https://www.pri.org/stories/2018-02-20/seouls-doing-cafe-creates-
community-around-feminism-still-taboo-south-korea) on February 20, 2018. It is
republished here as part of a partnership between PRI and Global Voices._

Ha Yoon-na always believed in feminism, but never wanted to call herself a
“feminist.” In South Korea, that word carries a negative connotation, and Ha,
a 30-year-old book translator, worried she’d be judged and marginalized.

Ha overcame her fear last year when she visited a feminist space in Seoul. At
Doing Cafe, among its more than 1,000 volumes of feminist literature, plus
plenty of patrons eager to discuss them, she felt comfortable enough to talk
openly about feminism for the first time.

“I had low self-esteem until I came here. I wasn’t sure about myself,” Ha said
recently, sitting at a table with a book and a lemon tea. “Doing Cafe
empowered me and allowed me to admit I’m a feminist.”

Tucked beside Cheongdam Station on the streets of the capital city’s poshest
district, Gangnam (featured in Psy's 2012 pop hit, “[Gangnam
Style](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=CH1XGdu-hzQ)”), Doing Cafe would be
unassuming if not for its vivid yellow exterior. Upon closer inspection, it
becomes clear that the place is more than a simple cafe — a sign on its door
proclaims that it's a “cultural home of feminism.”

![](https://globalvoices.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/02/DoingExterior2.jpg)

Except for the bright yellow color, Doing Cafe is unassuming from the outside.
Credit: Ann Babe/PRI

In South Korea, where patriarchal and misogynistic attitudes remain deeply
embedded in the mainstream culture, Doing Cafe is sort of an unusual, if
subversive, establishment. It's the first feminist cafe of its kind in South
Korea, according to owner Kim Ryeo-il, adding that it's attracted more than
10,000 visitors, mostly women in their 20s and 30s, from across the nation
since opening in March 2017. It’s also inspired a handful of other local
feminist spaces.

Through Doing’s many resources and events — including a feminist library, art
exhibitions, guest lectures, store merchandise, social gatherings and one-on-
one counseling (conducted by Kim, who has an advanced degree in feminist
theology) — it aims to support young women like Ha in their struggle to assert
their right to equality.

![](https://globalvoices.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/02/OwnerRyeo-ilKim1.jpg)

The cafe's owner, Kim Ryeo-il, has long wanted to open a place like this, but
never imagined she'd be able to bring it to fruition. Credit: Ann Babe/PRI

“This cafe is for the sake of a cultural, societal movement,” said Kim, who
also goes by the English name Liz. Most people find out about Doing through
social media.

Fifty-year-old Kim hopes today’s movement will bring greater change than the
first feminist wave of the 1990s — and less of a backlash. “It hasn’t become a
good world,” she said, shaking her head. “Today’s generation of women in their
20s and 30s … don’t live in a better society than I did.”

Indeed, despite South Korea’s global reputation for cutting-edge technology
and trending pop culture, the country lags far behind when it comes to gender
equality. It holds one of the worst records in the world, according to the
World Economic Forum, [ranking 118 out of 144
nations](http://www.koreaherald.com/view.php?ud=20171102000907), and among
OECD countries, [it comes in last for wage
parity](https://data.oecd.org/earnwage/gender-wage-gap.htm).

![](https://globalvoices.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/02/DoingInterior2.jpg)

The Post-it notes on this display inside Doing Cafe share patrons’ wishes for
the future and messages of thanks. Credit: Ann Babe/PRI

Social analysts say South Korea’s inequality stems, in part, from its
Confucian culture that enforces rigid social roles and gender norms. For Ha,
this inequality is felt within her own family, whereby she says her parents
treat her younger brother like a “prince,” while they criticize her feminist
beliefs as “an escape from reality” and a “self-delusion.”

“I thought of myself as the odd one out because my family is very conservative
and very Confucianist,” Ha said. “I felt lonely.” Like Ha’s parents, her
younger brother and sister also eyed feminism as a “dangerous” form of “female
chauvinism” and told her they didn’t understand her interest in it.

This reaction is not uncommon in South Korea. “Feminist ideas are still very
alien to many people here,” said Helen Noh, professor of social welfare at
Soongsil University. “Feminist issues can bring a lot of discomfort.”

![](https://globalvoices.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/02/DoingInterior1.jpg)

A sign on this cafe bookshelf reads, “Cultural Home of Feminism.” Credit: Ann
Babe/PRI

That’s because feminism is still taboo, widely misunderstood as the hatred of
men or the superiority of women. “When people hear the word feminism, they
imagine a very extreme image,” Noh said. “They do not know the real meaning.”

Even Ha wasn’t completely sure what the term meant, despite unknowingly
agreeing with its values. So, she joined Doing in search of a better
understanding — mostly for herself, but that understanding ended up extending
to the people around her, as well.

“My notion of feminism was very vague. I wanted to explain feminism, but I
couldn’t because I didn’t have concrete thoughts,” she said. “Now, I share my
views with my younger brother, and he wants to know about feminism and gender
equality.”

![](https://globalvoices.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/02/YoonnaHa2.jpg)

Ha Yoon-na always believed in feminism but was reluctant to call herself a
“feminist” until she found a community at Doing Cafe. Credit: Ann Babe/PRI

Fifteen years ago, when Kim was divorced and raising two kids on her own, she
dreamed of building a feminist space, but couldn’t have imagined it would
someday be a reality. At that time, she was struggling just to make ends meet.

In May 2016, everything changed. That’s when, one night in a Gangnam restroom,
[a man stabbed a young woman to
death](http://english.hani.co.kr/arti/english_edition/e_national/744756.html);
he had waited for more than 50 minutes as six different men used the toilet
and then targeted the first woman who entered. The man later confessed, “I did
it because women have always ignored me.” While the murder was not charged as
a hate crime, connected instead to mental illness, [it shook the
country](http://www.latimes.com/world/asia/la-fg-south-korea-woman-
killed-20160521-snap-story.html) and sparked dialogue about its entrenched
misogyny.

For Kim, it pushed her to get to work on opening Doing.

Doing filled a gaping void. “There aren’t many places discussing these sorts
of issues in Korea,” said Ha. “It helps people interested in feminism but
afraid to call themselves feminists. It brings them together and helps them
share their ideas.” Ha believes that by serving as a starting point for
awareness building and education, Doing can bring feminist ideas to the
broader Korean community.

Still, not every patron understands Doing’s mission. “Passersby don’t know
what this cafe is about,” said Kim, who has on occasion encountered people
that stop in randomly and end up having anti-feminist conversations,
vocalizing their homophobia or bragging about buying cheap sex.

Additionally, the first year has been so tough on Kim financially that she
often thinks about closing up shop, but the teary-eyed gratitude she receives
from her patrons keeps her going. “In the end, maybe we can really build a
better world,” she said. “That is my dream.”

Another patron, 17-year-old Casey Kim, who identifies as nonbinary (a gender
identity that is neither entirely male nor entirely female), says they first
heard about the space when living in Gangwon-do, the far eastern province
where the Pyeongchang Winter Olympics are currently being held. But that
didn’t stop Casey Kim from commuting regularly to the cafe, which felt like
home.

![](https://globalvoices.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/02/DoingCelebration1.jpg)

Many of the feminist cafe's regulars turned out for its one-year anniversary
with kimbap rolls, wine and music. Seoul's Doing Cafe features a feminist
library, art exhibitions, guest lectures, store merchandise, social gatherings
and one-on-one counseling. Credit: Ann Babe/PRI

On a brisk February night, Casey Kim, Ha and about 50 other supporters of Cafe
Doing gathered in celebration of its first birthday. Doing turns 1 in March.
The atmosphere was boisterous, with the lights dimmed and a disco ball
throwing bright reflections off the art- and book-lined walls. Attendees
mingled, ate kimbap rolls and drank wine against the backdrop of a carefully
curated playlist of women’s empowerment music; cafe owner Kim Ryeo-il emceed.

Looking over her patrons, she beamed. The crowd clapped and cheered.

“Doing helped me to find my voice,” said Ha. “Getting rid of misogyny totally
will not happen in my lifetime … but I feel it’s my duty to say, ‘It’s wrong,’
and explain why.”

_Ann Babe reported from Seoul, South Korea._

