[![](https://globalvoices.org/wp-
content/uploads/2018/03/2760560588_503f5c2014_o.jpg)](https://www.flickr.com/photos/worldbank/2760560588/)

A teacher writes an English sentence on a blackboard during an English class.
Cambodia. Photo: © Masaru Goto / World Bank. CC BY-NC-ND 2.0

_This story by[Nicola Prentis](https://www.pri.org/people/nicola-prentis) for
GlobalPost originally[ ](http://www.pri.org/people/meradith-
hoddinott)[appeared on PRI.org](https://www.pri.org/stories/2018-03-28/how-
english-language-pronouns-are-taught-around-world) on March 28, 2018, and is
republished here as part of a partnership between PRI and Global Voices._

The teacher holds up a pen in the first lesson and says, “It’s my pen.” The
students, English language learners who could be any age from preschool to
pensioner and from any country in the world, echo, “It’s my pen.” The teacher
then takes a pen from one of the students and says, “It’s her pen.” The class
repeats.

Later, for review, the teacher holds up a student’s pen and invites someone to
supply the right response. A student offers, “It’s his pen,” and the teacher,
with raised eyebrows but an encouraging smile says, “ _His_ pen?” stressing
the word to signal the error and, perhaps, gesturing to the pen's owner. The
student quickly corrects the mistake: “It’s _her_ pen.”

Globally, close to 1 billion people are learning English as a Foreign Language
(EFL), and all of them encounter binary gender pronouns from the earliest
lessons. It’s a grammar point covered at the beginner level. Making
observations about binary gender appears in exams for young children with
questions such as, “Is your best friend a boy or a girl?” and “Is your teacher
a man or a woman?” But as gender awareness grows and new words and grammar
around gender identity enter the language, EFL teachers are potentially at the
forefront of influencing the way a billion people around the world think about
gender.

In the pen exercise, there are two main ways the pronoun activity could be
changed: A student describing possession could answer with, “It’s _their_
pen.” Or, the teacher could talk about some of the new gender-neutral
pronouns, so students have other options besides _his_ or _her_ at their
disposal, should they need it — like [_nir,_ _vis, eir,_ _hir,_ _zir_ and
_xyr_](https://genderneutralpronoun.wordpress.com/) _._

EFL materials, on the whole, have been including singular _they_ for years.
“Everyone was talking about gender balance in materials,” says English
Language Teaching consultant Frances Amrani recalling her work with Cambridge
University Press in 2000. “We were encouraged to think about it on all
projects. On my first project, [a course book called “Vantage”] for the
Council of Europe […] we agreed that ‘their’ was commonly used as a neutral
singular pronoun and that it dated back to [the 14th or 15th century].” An
example sentence about singular _their_ made it into the grammar explanations
at the back of the pre-intermediate-level book.

When it comes to teaching singular _they_ to refer to people who identify as
nonbinary, it’s unlikely that course books will reflect this usage anytime
soon. Although they are based on “corpus data” — huge banks of language as it
is being used — EFL course books will always have a lag between when something
recurs enough to have become standard in written or spoken language and when
it appears in a teaching syllabus. Authors and editors also have input into
what is included. “If words catch on and become widely used really quickly and
are of obvious use, like ‘selfie,’ then they'll probably make it in quite
quickly. Others that are a bit more niche will inevitably take longer,” says
lexicographer Julie Moore.

Bearing in mind the time it takes to publish a new course book, it would mean
at least another few years before “This is Sarah’s pen, give it to _them_ ” is
printed in learning materials.

That might sound slow, but look at the word _Ms._ , which [took about 70 years
before it was in widespread
use](http://www.nytimes.com/2009/10/25/magazine/25FOB-onlanguage-t.html) in
1972 and was probably only established in course books in the mid-'80s.

Browsing through his collection of old books, the EFL methodology writer,
Scott Thornbury, says he found no instances of _Ms._ in a 1976 course book,
“Strategies,” (Longman Publishing Co.), but quite a few examples of _Mrs._ and
one _Miss_. But, by 1979, while the textbook, “Encounters,” (Heinemann),
presents the same choices for filling out an official form, including _Mr._ ,
the Teachers’ Book notes:

> Point out Miss/Mrs distinction. If students ask, explain Ms as modern term
> for both Miss and Mrs.

The Cambridge English Course Book 2 Teacher's Book (1985) didn’t wait for
students to ask:

> Finish by making sure that students know first name, Christian name,
> surname, Mr, Mrs, Miss, Ms.

Finally, by 1986, Ms made it into a students’ book with Headway Intermediate
offering Ms, along with Mr, Mrs, and Miss, as an option in writing formal
letters.

Could we expect a progression like this to happen faster nowadays, with the
internet zapping new words around the world and into corpus databases?

Some independent, digital publishers are moving faster and with a focus on
individual student needs. Sue Lyon-Jones, an EFL author and publisher of web-
based courses, cites the growing trend for singular they as one of the reasons
she’s chosen to incorporate [nonbinary they in an online grammar
lesson](https://www.esolcourses.com/uk-english/pre-intermediate-
grammar/personal-pronouns/subject-pronouns.html). But also she feels
“equipping English language learners with vocabulary to talk about themselves
and their identity is an important part of our job.”

Similarly, teachers in their own classrooms have a certain amount of freedom
to adapt the published materials they use in class and teach language they
think is important, without waiting for justification from corpus. Nonbinary
they is already popping up in EFL classrooms across the world.

Leigh Moss, who’s taught in Vietnam and Italy, is using it in classes. “I
teach ‘they’ as gender neutral since xe/ze isn't in common use and I have non-
binary friends who prefer ‘they’ and this is how I'd use it,” says Moss.

Jessie Fuller, an EFL teacher in Brazil, agrees. “I normally use ‘they’ for
gender neutral, then only get into ‘ze’ if a student seems interested.”

Teachers can always find a way to present language so it doesn’t confuse. They
regularly teach incredibly complex or nonintuitive things. Take the phrase,
“How do you do?” It’s typically taught at the early levels despite being a
question that isn’t really a question, and it having nothing to do with the
manner in which you _do_ anything at all. It has to be taught with an
explanation, at least briefly, of the social and cultural nuances that
accompany it: It’s only used the first time you meet someone, only in very
formal conversations and, these days, probably only with older generations or
the very upper classes.

Singular they, or the concept of nonbinary pronouns, doesn’t look any more
linguistically complicated than “How do you do?” and no more conceptually or
culturally challenging than removing the marital status of women when you
address them. Whether it will take 70 years to make nonbinary pronouns
mainstream like Ms., time will tell. But teachers who teach them will spread
them far beyond the 400 million or so people who speak English as a first
language.

