[![](https://globalvoices.org/wp-
content/uploads/2018/03/2018-03-30_12-58-02-800x449.png)](https://youtu.be/gBSiikjH8B8)

“Takashi Murakami's cafe, mysterious gacha & Nakano sights Tokyo vlog”.
[Screencap from Mimei YouTube channel](https://youtu.be/gBSiikjH8B8).

With her energetic, friendly commentary set to vibrant background music,
popular Tokyo-based vlogger [Mimei](http://www.youtube.com/mimei) shows off
the various streets of Japan's most populous city, one day at a time on
YouTube, [Instagram](http://instagram.com/mimeiland),
[Twitter](http://www.twitter.com/mimei) and other social media channels.

Mimei, who hails from Auckland, New Zealand, originally joined the video-
sharing site in 2010 after living in Japan for a year, and “[Mimei
Land](https://youtu.be/gsqJyq0NAps)” is actually an off-shoot of her which
catered to Japanese audiences.

She describes “Mimei Land” as a place to “share my life, my adventures, and my
strange discoveries with you”. Mimei's YouTube channel currently has over
162,000 subscribers, and has amassed over 14 million views since it was
created in August 2011.

Fans of the channel, who Mimei lovingly refers to as “Pineapples”, are treated
to videos that show off the many sides of Tokyo, from the backstreets of the
city, to the Kagurazaka Shopping District, and to the world famous Shibuya
crossing. Almost every video begins with the “Japanese Street of the Day”, and
features bustling streets from various locations around Tokyo. Learn more
about Mimei in her [video introduction](https://youtu.be/gsqJyq0NAps).

[Mimei's Instagram account](https://www.instagram.com/mimeiland/) is also
popular, and features snapshots of Tokyo and other places.

> [ok, i will let it go after this last picture 🌸 can't wait to see the cherry
> blossoms again next year ✨](https://www.instagram.com/p/BUeQjJMj3TW/)
>
> A post shared by [ mimei](https://www.instagram.com/mimeiland/) (@mimeiland)
> on May 24, 2017 at 4:05am PDT

In addition to exploring the [hidden treasures of
Tokyo](https://youtu.be/uH6MfhDFZbE), Mimei Land features videos exploring
other places of interest within Japan, including Himeji Castle and the famous
deer of Nara.

The channel also features footage all about her travels to other countries,
including South Korea and Germany.

> [spent the day at Himeji with my best friend in the world yesterday 🏯💕
> 昨日友人と一緒に姫路城に行ってきた☺️](https://www.instagram.com/p/Bf4cXPVHMKV/)
>
> A post shared by [ mimei](https://www.instagram.com/mimeiland/) (@mimeiland)
> on Mar 3, 2018 at 4:54pm PST

Mimei's personal interests add charm to the videos, with topics ranging from
vegan eateries in Tokyo, trying out weird _gashapon_ (capsule toy) vending
machines, and taste-testing the latest featured drinks at Starbucks Japan. The
excitement of documenting her adventures in Tokyo is balanced with small vlogs
featuring her husband, fellow Japan Youtuber [PDR-
san](https://www.youtube.com/user/PDRKabushikigaisha), and their three cats.

Each video is crafted with stylish shots of various areas of Tokyo, coupled
with catchy electronic music, all of which stem from Mimei's love of
photography and editing videos.

