![](https://globalvoices.org/wp-
content/uploads/2019/07/Ukraine_Vote_12-800x507.jpg)

A polling station in central Kyiv, Ukraine, during parliamentary elections on
21 July 2019. Photo (c) by Maxim Edwards.

On Sunday July 21, Ukrainian voters went to the polls to vote in a snap
parliamentary election, called after President Volodymyr Zelensky, elected in
March 2019, announced a [controversial decision to dissolve the
parliament](https://www.rferl.org/a/ukrainian-constitutional-court-oks-
parliament-s-dissolution-early-poll/30010735.html) during his inauguration.

Online misinformation, cyber-attacks, and the overall threat of external
interference in the election were not last minute concerns; these issues [were
raised several months before the
election](https://globalvoices.org/2019/03/26/with-elections-just-days-away-
ukraine-faces-disinformation-cyber-attacks-and-further-russian-interference/).
Ultimately, the election passed without major disruptions; Zelensky’s [Servant
of the People
party](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Servant_of_the_People_\(political_party\))
took a majority of seats in parliament. So while some of these concerns turned
out to be unjustified, the role of the internet in Sunday’s elections was more
important than ever; according to 2019 data from the country’s State
Statistical Service, [26 million Ukrainians are
online](https://ain.ua/en/2019/02/20/number-of-internet-users-in-ukraine/) and
at least half that number actively use social networks.

Ukrainian social media users have always actively discussed political topics
online; the 2014 Euromaidan protests were famously [sparked by a single
Facebook post.](https://www.businessinsider.com/heres-how-facebook-kicked-off-
the-euromaidan-revolution-2015-7) This year, which also included a
presidential election in March, was no exception. According to analysis by
Internews Ukraine and data analytics company Singularex, Sunday’s elections
provoked a [tsunami of activity on social
networks](https://internews.ua/opportunity/fb-instagram-
vk?fbclid=IwAR2SUYTsvKWhxHT3a_XWtTQYiDF5Hx5ID3grkYSw0un6aItyNN7Q0hJ8eSg), with
election-related posts surging immediately after the announcement of the
parliament’s dissolution.

The most widespread hashtags were [**‪**
#‎вибори2019](https://twitter.com/search?q=%E2%80%AA%23%E2%80%8Eвибори2019)
(“2019 elections”); supporters of Servant of the People used the hashtags[
#зробимоїхразом](https://twitter.com/search?q=%C2%A0%23зробимоїхразом) (“let’s
beat them together!”) and
[#зедепутат](https://twitter.com/search?q=%23зедепутат) (“Ze[lensky]Deputy”),
while supporters of the Golos party led by popular singer Svyatoslav Vakarchuk
used
**‪**[#‎КомандаЗмін](https://twitter.com/search?q=%23%E2%80%8EКомандаЗмін)‬
(“team of change”).

Interestingly, social media users were not too optimistic about the upcoming
elections, with negative rhetoric towards all parties dominating 42% of
Facebook posts identified as “political” during the analysis, while positive
rhetoric was found in only 15% of the posts.

![](https://globalvoices.org/wp-content/uploads/2019/07/eng-6-800x521.png)

The dynamics of elections-related Facebook posts in Ukraine during May 1 –
July 17, 2019, according to analysis by Internews Ukraine and Singularex. Used
with permission.

Nevertheless, with Facebook becoming the country’s leading social network
after the [2017 ban](http://www.uadn.net/2017/05/16/ukraine-bans-leading-
russian-internet-sites/) of Russian social media sites, negative rhetoric
hardly deterred politicians from targeting the country’s [13 million active
Facebook users](https://ain.ua/en/2019/02/14/facebook-audience-ukraine/). This
tactic comes as no surprise given that the success of Zelensky’s presidential
campaign on a few months before was partially attributed to [engaging with
younger voters online](https://www.rferl.org/a/leading-ukraine-candidate-
zelenskyy-facebook-fakes-political-ad-rules/29828605.html). At the same time,
parties and candidates also actively used Instagram, YouTube, Twitter, and
messaging platforms such as Viber and Telegram.

Alongside the increasingly sophisticated targeted advertising services
provided by Facebook and other platforms, current Ukrainian election
legislation [does not distinguish between online and offline
campaigning.](https://www.oporaua.org/en/article/vybory/parlamentski-
vybory/parlamentski-vybory-2019/FB_ad) It does not establish clear mechanisms
for candidates to report nor for regulators to monitor expenses allocated
towards Internet advertisements. Such legal loopholes provided for very little
oversight over electoral contestants’ online activity, especially in the
sphere of political advertising.

In fact, according to election observers, this year Ukrainian politicians used
social media and particularly Facebook for campaigning more actively than ever
before, with [40,427 political
ads](https://www.oporaua.org/en/article/vybory/parlamentski-
vybory/parlamentski-vybory-2019/FB_ad) published on the social network during
the active campaign period. In total, this cost all election contestants more
than $1,800,000.

![](https://globalvoices.org/wp-content/uploads/2019/07/Opora_political-
ads-800x477.png)

The growth in number of ads identified by Facebook as “political” during
active campaign period in Ukraine. Graph by OPORA. Used with permission

Having reviewed interim campaign finance reports by political parties,
domestic watchdog OPORA noted [substantial
discrepancies](https://www.oporaua.org/article/vybory/parlamentski-
vybory/parlamentski-vybory-2019/FB_ad) between the data from Facebook’s
advertisement library and the amounts which some Ukrainian political parties
had declared they had spent on online advertising.

Moreover, alongside campaigns by parties and candidates, OPORA recorded an
[increase in the use of promoted posts with elements of so-called “black
PR”](https://www.oporaua.org/en/article/vybory/parlamentski-
vybory/parlamentski-vybory-2019/FB_ad) (deliberate spreading of negative
information against particular candidates), sometimes by Facebook pages not
clearly affiliated with any political force. At the same time, a coalition of
media monitors stressed that over half of the political parties and their
leaders [used hate speech](https://www.ukrinform.ua/rubric-
elections/2743081-bilse-polovini-partij-ta-ihnih-lideriv-vikoristovuut-u-fb-
movu-vorozneci.html) and aimed to discredit their opponents in their Facebook
posts.

Alongside advertisements on social media, the five parties [expected to take
seats in parliament](https://europeelects.eu/2019/07/17/ukrainian-elections-
reshuffling-the-political-spectrum/) used a variety of other online methods to
engage voters. For instance, some urged voters to provide their [phone
numbers](http://zagittya.com.ua/), subscribe to [mailing
lists](https://batkivshchyna.us9.list-
manage.com/subscribe/post?u=debdee0675a64247d5e0cd87e&id=f11292cc44), join
Viber or [Telegram messenger channels](https://t.me/s/SlugaNarodu_Official),
engage with their messenger bots to [receive
information](https://t.me/SlugaNaroduHelpBot) about the party or [observe
elections](https://t.me/golos_OK_bot), or [install mobile
applications](https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=com.sluganarodu.app&hl=en).
Most of these mechanisms would provide subscribers with information about the
party and its candidates, their election platform, and the latest news, as
well as basic information about voting. In addition, some parties also used
their websites to actively recruit members, volunteers, and candidates.

![](https://globalvoices.org/wp-content/uploads/2019/07/European-Solidarity-
sign-up-form-800x433.png)

A screenshot of the European Solidarity party’s online voter sign up form,
with a consent box to use voter data “for the mailing list and other”.

For example, although Ukrainian internet users sometimes debate the risks of
their data being collected by Russian online platforms and tools, it seems
that very few think about how their data is being collected and used by
domestic actors.

All five leading political parties during the election asked voters for their
contact information online. Among them, only two parties (Golos and Servant of
the People) provided users with detailed [privacy
policies](https://goloszmin.org/) outlining such details as what would happen
with their data after elections or the [use of
cookies](https://sluganarodu.ua/join) on their websites, though only Servant
of the People asked for users’ explicit consent for processing their personal
data in a separate field. Two parties (European Solidarity and Fatherland)
asked users to join their [mailing list](https://eurosolidarity.org/) but did
not provide [much detail](https://batkivshchyna.us9.list-
manage.com/subscribe/post?u=debdee0675a64247d5e0cd87e&id=f11292cc44) about how
their data would be processed. One party (Opposition Platform – For Life),
whose main website uses a [simple HTTP protocol](http://zagittya.com.ua/),
failed to specify how the data provided by users would be utilized at all.
Given that new technologies constantly provide politicians with new forms and
methods of campaigning, election observers have already called on the
Ukrainian authorities [to update legal regulations
](https://www.oporaua.org/en/article/vybory/parlamentski-vybory/parlamentski-
vybory-2019/FB_ad)around online political advertising and other methods of
digital campaigning.

However, the fact that two newly established political parties went as far as
to develop detailed privacy policies for their online supporters indicates
that the Ukrainian public’s consciousness around data privacy and security is
slowly changing for the better.

