![](https://globalvoices.org/wp-content/uploads/2019/06/Screen-
Shot-2019-06-28-at-10.50.07-am.png)

Screenshot from “Playing Against Patriarchy: Muslim Girls own the ‘Male Space’
by Playing Football” video.

_This post was written by Grace Jolliffe and originally[appeared on Video
Volunteers](https://www.videovolunteers.org/playing-against-patriarchy-muslim-
girls-own-the-male-space-by-playing-football/), an award-winning international
community media organisation based in India. A slightly edited version is
published below as part of a content-sharing agreement._

A group of young Muslim girls harbour dreams of becoming footballers one day.
They have turned out to practice in a government playground in the Rajabazar
slum area in [Kolkata](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Kolkata), the capital of
the Indian state of [West Bengal](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/West_Bengal).
They dream of dribbling and playing on bigger grounds, before bigger crowds.
VideoVolunteers community correspondent Debgopal Mondal interviewed some of
the young girls, creating a [video
report](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=2GvDw0tb5DU) which shows how the girls
are challenging gender norms through sport.

[Shahina Javed](http://insidetheglow.com/shahina-javed) is the woman who set
up this all-girl football team. As the founder of the NGO, Roshni, which
fights domestic abuse, dowry, and child marriage, Shahina has been breaking
societal norms for the past ten years. Besides empowering adolescent girls,
Roshni also conducts awareness workshops on a women's rights to education.

#### Read: [Years After Marriage, Indian Women Dare to Say Their Husbands’
Names for the First Time](https://globalvoices.org/2017/06/17/years-after-
marriage-indian-women-dare-to-say-their-husbands-names-for-the-first-time/)

Although Indian women have long been [discriminated against in the world of
sports](https://www.female-rights.com/india/), these Muslim girls are pushing
against the idea that it is only a ‘male space’. According to one of the young
girls, Mehvi Shira, participating in the all-girls team has taught her that
girls are just as good as boys:

> We used to think boys can play football, but girls cannot, but then we
> realised that both of them can play. They are equal. If the boy can study
> more, a girl can also study more. If a boy can participate, a girl can also
> participate.

In India, it is not easy for girls to get ahead in sports. Gender
discrimination can be seen in the gender pay gaps, biased attitude towards
female athletes, and not to mention the frequent sexual remarks and harassment
incidents. This disparity highlights problems which are deeply rooted in the
sports system and society in general. The lack of facilities, opportunity, and
support by the government is also an added factor as to why young girls are
giving up on their dreams. Tani Fatima says:

> The ground does not belong to [the boys]. It's for all of us. We have the
> right to go there and play. They stop us from playing. We do not have a
> proper space to play which is affecting our game.

#### Read: [How Are Boys and Girls Supposed to Sit, Walk, and Dance? An
Experiment in India's Gujarat.](https://globalvoices.org/2017/07/10/how-are-
boys-and-girls-supposed-to-sit-walk-and-dance-an-experiment-in-indias-
gujarat/)

While many in India think that gender equality in sport is a utopian idea,
there has been a growing movement of people who are coming forward to talk
about and fix some of the issues faced by women. VideoVolunteer's network of
video activists (both men and women alike) are committed towards equality and
work around breaking patriarchal norms under the [Khel Badal
Campaign](https://www.videovolunteers.org/dismantling-patriarchy-at-the-roots-
one-video-one-conversation-at-one-time/) of VideoVolunteers. This is an
example of how VideoVolunteers wants to portray stories about how women, face,
negotiate and challenge patriarchy.

Watch the [video](https://youtu.be/2GvDw0tb5DU):

