![](https://es.globalvoices.org/wp-content/uploads/2019/04/Fernando-
ELoy-1-800x534.png)

Photo by Fernando Eloy and used with permission.

_To commemorate the[International Year of Indigenous
Languages](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/International_Year_of_Indigenous_Languages),
governmental, academic and civil society institutions have joined forces to
organize many activities, including participation in government spaces by
members of indigenous communities working in defense and protection of their
languages. One of these events took place in Mexico's Chamber of Deputies, on
April 24, 2019, when Alejandra Sasil Sánchez Chan gave a speech in the Mayan
language. Sánchez made history by __directly_ _denouncing, at the country's
seat of power, the dangers that contemporary Mexican culture pose for the
indigenous heritage of the country. The original text can be
read[here](https://rising.globalvoices.org/lenguas/2019/04/24/discurso-de-
alejandra-sasil-sanchez-chan-del-24-de-abril-2019-en-la-camara-de-diputados-
de-mexico/)._

The Maya civilization is mainly known for its architecture that still stands,
but in today's world it also survives through its language: a language that is
also a form of resistance, which aims to preserve our identity. The power of
the word transcends governments and political, social or territorial limits.
This is where the wealth of our peoples is found.

The use of our native languages allows them to remain indelible on the
linguistic map of Mexico, and this helps the survival of the social values,
language and culture that are part of this colonization inherited from the
Conquest.

The [UNESCO Atlas of World's Languages in
Danger](http://www.unesco.org/new/en/culture/themes/endangered-
languages/atlas-of-languages-in-danger/) indicates that there are 6,000
languages in the world, and that 2,500 of them are in danger of disappearing.
The Atlas also points out that Mexico ranks fifth among countries with the
most threatened languages. This is because out of the languages spoken in this
country, 46 can be considered vulnerable, 35 clearly endangered, 33 seriously
threatened, and 19 in a critical situation. In total, 133 languages are in
danger.

Currently, speaking an indigenous language means keeping the root of its words
intact. It allows our very essence and vision of the world that is woven
within language to find new ways of thinking, and our cultural identity to
evolve with each voice that finds the legacy of its ancestors in its mother
tongue.

It is not by chance that linguists conceive of languages as trees, with
thousands of branches growing interconnected. Trees with great roots fell
under the weight of discrimination and oblivion. Many worldviews, poems,
aesthetic expressions, sounds and knowledge vanish with every language that
ceases to exist. This cultural devastation should hurt us profoundly, because
it is like we are uprooting a tree that was planted generations ago.

Now we only have words, words that are creative and strong, to show us the
road; evolving and leading us towards new ways of surviving in this country,
as a testimony of our world. For that reason, the Mayan language and all
sister languages must become a written medium, as proof that our roots can
survive, and through which the next generations will have a starting point
towards new ways of preserving their voices and their roots.

For a long time we were the tree. Now we are the shadow, the fallen logs,
dried or burned; the lands that have been taken from us by the factories and
big industries, the struggles that have been lost against the strength of the
State's official status; the abuses that our people have lived through the
years and that have been normalized. We have to raise our voice, indeed. And
even more important, we have to go beyond being just spectators. We have to
act.

That is why it is critical to put into action what was established in the
Constitution, in the agreements and laws. The General Law of Linguistic
Rights, in its sixth article, stipulates that: “The State will adopt and
implement the necessary measures to ensure that the mass media disseminate the
real linguistic and cultural diversity of the Mexican Nation.” ILO Convention
169 states in Article 16: “States shall take effective measures to ensure that
State media properly reflect indigenous cultural diversity.”

States, without prejudice to the obligation to fully guarantee freedom of
expression, should also encourage private media companies to duly reflect
indigenous cultural diversity.

This means the creation of media from our own vision, media that addresses our
concerns and shows the world that there are more complex issues than corporate
ambition. For example, [_K'iintsil_](https://www.lajornadamaya.mx/kiintsil),
the only newspaper in Mayan language in the Yucatan Peninsula, for four years
has been publishing articles with a historical significance. The newspaper's
motto honors and teaches about our wisdom and our language, making it visible
everyday.

There is an urgent need for educational systems that incorporate the wisdom of
our peoples, which do not perpetuate the idea of ​​colonization; systems of
economy, art, health, entertainment, everything conceived from our worldview.

Each word is like a heartbeat that continues to be heard against all odds,
each letter in books and digital media is another form of freedom—a way to end
marginalization and racism, because we are the ones who carry the voice of our
parents and grandparents with dignity and pride.

That is why it is important to increase the means we have to communicate, to
enjoy our language and explore its multiple ways of creating new worlds, and
other ways of envisioning our future. We want to have more spaces where we can
communicate and live freely; spaces where our mother tongues can exist as they
once did before the Conquest.

I do not want my voice, nor those that have preceded or will follow me, to be
applauded just for being spoken in this space. As a citizen of the Mexican
State, I demand that my language, our languages ​​and peoples, have the same
opportunities to survive and exist without the fear of being extinguished. To
achieve this requires that those who have the capability to do something
within legal and official frameworks must act now, in every way they can.

The start is complying with what the law and common sense stipulate.

Honoring the word is the first step so that wisdom does not fade away.

