In the days since the latest Israeli offensive against Gaza, protests have
sprung up in numerous cities around the world to support Palestine and call
for an end to the ongoing attacks. Recognizing the need to demonstrate
solidarity, a [Tumblr has been
created](http://theworldstandswithpalestine.tumblr.com/) to document these
protests. The account, which is anonymous, states its purpose is to collect
“Photos, videos, and reports from demonstrations in solidarity with Palestine
during Israel's ongoing attacks and collective punishment.” These are images
from just a few of the demonstrations that have taken place in countries
around the world.

!["World Cup protests in Brazil become Gaza
protests."](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2014/07/brazil-800x375.jpg)

“World Cup protests in Brazil become Gaza protests.” – July 12, 2014.”

![Kabul, Afghanistan - July 13, 2014.](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2014/07/Kabul.jpg)

Kabul, Afghanistan – July 13, 2014.

![Hyderabad, India - July 13, 2014.](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2014/07/hyderabad.jpg)

Hyderabad, India – July 13, 2014.

![Helsinki, Finland - July 12, 2014.](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2014/07/helsinki.jpg)

Helsinki, Finland – July 12, 2014.

![Istanbul, Turkey - July 12, 2014.](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2014/07/istanbul.jpg)

Istanbul, Turkey – July 12, 2014.

![San Francisco, CA \(US\) - July 12,
2014.](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2014/07/SanFrancisco-800x600.jpg)

San Francisco, CA (US) – July 12, 2014.

![South Korea - July 12, 2014.](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2014/07/Seoul.jpg)

Seoul, South Korea – July 12, 2014.

![The Hague, Netherlands - July 12, 2014.](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2014/07/Hague-800x450.jpg)

The Hague, Netherlands – July 12, 2014.

![Japan - July 12, 2014.](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2014/07/Japan-794x600.jpg)

Japan – July 12, 2014.

!["Today, the people of South Africa marched in support of the Palestinians
that are suffering under the Occupation. Nelson Mandela once said “We know too
well that our freedom is incomplete without the freedom of the Palestinians.”
So today we stood up to be the voice of the voiceless." - July 13,
2014.](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2014/07/southafrica-800x600.jpg)

“Today, the people of South Africa marched in support of the Palestinians that
are suffering under the Occupation. Nelson Mandela once said “We know too well
that our freedom is incomplete without the freedom of the Palestinians.” So
today we stood up to be the voice of the voiceless.” – July 13, 2014.

![Indonesia - July 12, 2014.](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2014/07/indonesia-800x506.jpg)

Indonesia – July 12, 2014.

!["Montreal protesters holding the longest Palestinian flag in the world
during Gaza Solidarity protest on Friday July 11,
2014."](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2014/07/montreal-800x533.jpg)

“Montreal protesters holding the longest Palestinian flag in the world during
Gaza Solidarity protest on Friday July 11, 2014.”

![Maldives - July 12, 2014.](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2014/07/maldives.jpg)

Maldives – July 12, 2014.

![Tunis, Tunisia - July 13, 2014.](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2014/07/Tunis.jpg)

Tunis, Tunisia – July 13, 2014.

![Valparaiso, Chile - July 12, 2014.](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2014/07/valparaiso-800x600.jpg)

Valparaiso, Chile – July 12, 2014.

![Berlin, Germany - July 12, 2014.](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2014/07/berlin-800x597.jpg)

Berlin, Germany – July 12, 2014.

![Canberra, Australia - July 18, 2014.](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2014/07/canberra.jpg)

Canberra, Australia – July 18, 2014.

!["On July 12th a group of people organised a silent protest in Krakow – in
solidarity with Gaza. Protesters printed names of all the children martyred in
Gaza during operation “Protective Edge”."](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2014/07/krakow-800x533.jpg)

“On July 12th a group of people organised a silent protest in Krakow – in
solidarity with Gaza. Protesters printed names of all the children martyred in
Gaza during operation “Protective Edge”.”

