[![Political demonstration in Azerbaijan. Photo by Jahangir Yusif, used with
permission.](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2014/04/Azerbaijan_Jahangir_Yusif.jpg)](https://www.facebook.com/photo.php?fbid=1419529024928788&set=a.1419527088262315.1073741841.100006151113214&type=3&theater)

Political demonstration in Azerbaijan. Photo by Jahangir Yusif, used with
permission.

When[ Maxim Gorky](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Maxim_Gorky) wrote about
revolutionary workers in his 1906 novel, “The Mother”, little did he know that
a century later, social uprisings and revolutions would still be affecting and
influencing the lives of people around the world.

He might not have imagined that in December 2013 in Azerbaijan, a young man
would read “The Mother” in his prison cell and, saddened by difficult
circumstances yet full of pride at having a heroic mother, be inspired to
write a letter to his own mother.

The young man’s name is Zaur Gurbanli. He is one of eight members of an
Azerbaijani youth movement called N!DA whom I witnessed undergoing court
proceedings in Baku on April 15, 2014. Together with his seven colleagues,
Zaur was charged with incitement to violence, illegal drug possession, illegal
possession of explosives, and hooliganism. By the end of April 2014, Zaur and
his cohorts will probably be charged with an additional series of grave
crimes, none of which any of these young men has committed. The Prosecutor
General has asked for a sentence of eight years in prison for each of the
young men.

Last December, Zaur
[wrote](http://www.azadliq.info/xeberler/358-xeber/38800-hbsd-olan-nidac-
gncin-anasna-tsirli-mktubu.html) to his mother, Sakina:

“Hi (smiley). I have read Gorky’s novel “The Mother”. In the book, the mother
is aware of the truth about her son, just like you….I read it with much
difficulty. It is like he was writing about all the things you had to endure….
You know what I remembered? There is this cartoon. The children’s mother gets
sick and asks her children for water. None of the children bring her water.
Then, the mother turns into a bird and flies away. And the children come
running with the water splashing. They are crying.

“When I was a child, I was afraid you, too, were going to turn into a bird and
fly away…. I read Gorky’s novel. I considered everything you have done while
I've been in prison. I was sure this mother will never get sick of her
children…. In these past 8 months, I feel like you have aged at least eight
years because of me. If life went according to the the plot in the cartoon,
you would be long gone by now. And I would be running after you with buckets
full of water. But you haven’t turned into a bird (smiley)….

“I have inherited everything from you. You brought me to this world twice
(smiley). That is why I am a very lucky man. That is why I am proud of you. I
have a mother worthy of novels.”

Zaur’s mother, Sakina, can see her son only during prison visits and court
hearings. It has been 11 months since she was able to sit down with her son
for dinner, or have a conversation that didn’t involve police officers,
courtrooms, or handcuffs. The mere experience of standing before the presiding
judge and navigating the justice system of Azerbaijan, makes her a hero
indeed. On my recent visit to Baku in April, I was able to meet the heroic
mom- a woman of strength indeed. Even the guards stood still as she spoke to
her son during the boys’ April 15 hearing.

Case in point: On April 1, a police vehicle transferring defendants to jail
stopped in front of the prison entrance, turned off its engine, and one of the
officers threw in a tear gas canister into the car. This came in response to
the defendants’ pleas that the car doors be opened, as one of them, a young
man called Ilkin Rustamzade, suffers from asthma. The prison service has
promised to look into the case, but a competing narrative maintains the
prisoners were attempting to
[escape](http://www.azadliq.org/content/article/25319828.html). The presiding
judge dismissed the petition to investigate the case as an example of torture,
saying the claim was unfounded.

Azerbaijani police are notorious for their poor treatment of captives. This is
how Mammad Azizov, another of the detained members of the N!DA movement,
recalls his [interrogation](http://cumhuriyyet.info/siyaset/1893-memmed-
ezizov-mtn-de-meni-zorlamaqla-hedelediler.html) [az]:

“The investigator got confused. He left to speak on the phone. A man named
Azer took me to the room and started beating me. He called someone on the
phone and said, “bring the bottle.” A man arrived with a baton. I was glad it
was not a bottle. He beat me on my head, on different parts of my body. The
beating continued for 15-20 minutes. Then they called another man and took me
to his room.

“His name was Mamay; they addressed him as “boss.” Mamay continued beating me
with his fists and kicking me, while Azer beat me with the baton. They beat me
continuously for an hour. They said I had to testify against Rashad [another
arrested member of N!DA]. I said I would not do it. Then Mamay said I had to
choose between being raped by a person, or with a bottle. I said I don't want
either. He rested a bit, then they continued beating me….”

**Trumped up charges**

If you examined the charges against activists, journalists or advocates
currently in jail or in pretrial detention, you would find hooliganism, tax
evasion, substance abuse, illegal possession of drugs, and illegal possession
of weapons with intent to use against the
[government](http://www.hrw.org/world-report/2013/country-
chapters/azerbaijan?page=2). Someone who doesn’t know the country well would
think that most of Azerbaijani's youth are drug addicts who buy or trade arms
in their spare time, while building bombs and mixing chemicals in their non-
existent basements. And of course all of this illicit behavior is caused by
that menace known as social media.

But it is not just the youth that are a threat to Azerbaijan. There is an
older generation of troublemakers who also engage in many of these illegal
behaviors. Anar Mammadli, the Chairman of Election Monitoring and Democracy
Studies Center has been in pretrial custody since December 2013, on bogus
charges. He is accused of tax evasion, illegal entrepreneurship, abuse of
office, and more. His organization has been involved in observing elections
for over a decade, reporting on election fraud. If convicted, he faces up to
12 years in jail.

Ilgar Mammadov, political analyst and chairman of the opposition group REAL
(Republican Alternative), was convicted together with Tofig Yagublu, columnist
and deputy chair of the opposition political party Musavat on March 17, 2014.
The two men were [found
guilty](http://azerireport.com/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=4281)
of instigating violence on January 24, 2013, during a visit to the northern
town of Ismayilli. The town was the site of anti-government riots, in response
to indecent behaviour on the part of a relative of the local governor.
Mammadov and Yagublu had travelled to Ismayilli to find out more about the
situation and [were arrested](https://www.amnesty.org/en/news/azerbaijan-stop-
score-settling-arrests-2013-02-05) during their visit.

**The other side of the rainbow**

While the government is engaged in a witch-hunt, curtailing the freedoms of
people like those mentioned above, certain other Azerbaijanis enjoy an
unfettered life. These include government officials and their families and
relatives, whose lives remain untouched by everyday realities, whose
businesses flourish, and who are never man-handled by the Azerbaijani police.

It is no secret that public servants and MPs in Azerbaijan are engaged in
business enterprise, though the law prohibits it. Corruption is at a record
high, with Transparency International[
ranking](http://cpi.transparency.org/cpi2013/results/) Azerbaijan 127th among
177 countries.

And here's the icing on the cake: on May 16, Azerbaijan will assume the
chairmanship of the Committee of Ministers of the Council of Europe. And
there's no doubt that the country will do its best to promote its image
abroad. Not the image of a country that tortures its citizens, of course, but
perhaps of a gentler nation that offers detainees the option of a being raped
with a bottle instead.

Back in that court room, my heart ached as I watched those eight young men.
They were there because Azerbaijani authorities are intimidated by the
intelligence of the country's youth, who deserve none of the treatment they
are getting. Seeing Zaur Gurbanli and his colleagues smile and exchange
messages with their friends and families, uncertain what was in store for them
and yet standing firmly on their feet passing jokes, was an image I felt the
whole world should see. But there were few people to witness it, and fewer
still will think of this image as the Council of Europe welcomes Azerbaijan to
the chair with wide grins on their faces.

