Indigenous people from the Munduruku ethnic group are fighting against the
construction of the São Luiz do Tapajós dam in the state of Pará, Brazil. The
dam will mean the flooding of 700,000 km2 in their homeland.

The Brazilian Federal Government plans to build [up to five dams in the
Tapajós River](http://oglobo.globo.com/economia/complexo-do-tapajos-no-para-
tem-potencia-maior-que-estimada-diz-eletrobras-2906794), where dozens of
indigenous communities live. Together with São Luiz do Tapajós, the Jatobá dam
was due to begin construction in 2015, but socio-environmental difficulties
[may have postponed that deadline to at least
2020](http://economia.estadao.com.br/noticias/geral,hidreletrica-no-tapajos-e-
adiada-para-2020-imp-,1568849). The two dams will cost together US$7 billion.

The Munduruku claim they have not been consulted about the project. For years,
the Munduruku people from the Sawré Maybu community, which will be directly
affected by the construction of São Luiz do Tapajós dam, [have pressured the
federal government to demarcate their
lands](http://redesustentabilidade.org.br/povo-munduruku-faz-autodemarcacao-
de-terra-para-evitar-que-area-seja-alagada-por-hidreletrica-no-para/). The
demarcation would create a legal obstacle for the continuation of the dam's
project.

A documentary about the issue was produced by videomaker [Nayana
Fernandez](https://autodemarcacaonotapajos.wordpress.com/2014/11/22/documentario-
mostra-resistencia-indigena-a-hidreletricas-no-tapajos/).

**UPDATE 09/12/2014:** Together with other organizations, Nayana Fernandez
[has launched a crowfunding
campaign](https://www.indiegogo.com/projects/munduruku-campaign-campanha-
munduruku) to help the Munduruku pressure the government to demarcate their
territory, officialize two associations, build a website and translate and dub
the documentary into their native language (most Mundurku people do not speak
Portuguese). Supporters can contribute with a minimum of US$10.

