![Zone9 members together in Addis Ababa, 2012. Photo used with
permission.](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2014/12/zone9ers.png)

Zone9 members together in Addis Ababa, 2012. Photo used with permission.

_This post was jointly published with the[World Policy Journal
](http://www.worldpolicy.org/blog/2014/12/02/zone9-defense-limits-
international-law)blog._

The international human rights system is broken – or perhaps it never worked
at all.

In case after case, citizens’ human rights are violated under the national
laws of their respective countries, despite the existence of international
human rights commitments in the United Nations’ Universal Declaration, and by
the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe, the Organization of
American States, the African Commission, and others. The International
Criminal Court has little say concerning any but the most egregious of
international human rights violations, and member states have wide latitude to
dispense justice as they see fit.

For those who live in countries that fail to provide or enforce their own laws
protecting freedom of expression, international principles have rarely
provided actual recourse. Today, this is the case with the independent
Ethiopian blogger collective known as Zone9.

In April of this year, the government of Ethiopia arrested six members of
Zone9 along with three affiliated journalists in Addis Ababa. They were held
for months without a formal charge and were denied the ability to communicate.
[Testimony](https://advocacy.globalvoicesonline.org/2014/10/14/journal-from-
an-ethiopian-prison-testimony-of-befeqadu-hailu-part-1/) from Befeqadu Hailu,
one of the accused bloggers who was smuggled out of prison in August, as well
as [statements](http://trialtrackerblog.org/) in court, allege mistreatment
and frequent beatings. Informally, the nine were held on
[accusations](http://www.thereporterethiopia.com/index.php/news-
headlines/item/1931-detained-journalists-bloggers-appear-before-court) of
“working with foreign organizations that claim to be human rights activists
and…receiving finance to incite public violence through social media.”

In July, the Zone9 prisoners were charged under Ethiopia’s Anti-Terrorism
Proclamation of 2009 for receiving support from political opposition
organizations, defined formally by the government as terrorists, and receiving
training from international activists in email encryption and data security
from the [Tactical Technology Collective](https://www.tacticaltech.org/), a
group that helps journalists and activists protect themselves from digital
surveillance.

The Zone9 bloggers joined other media outlets targeted under similar laws,
including Eskinder Nega, who had reported on recent Arab uprisings and the
possibility of similar uprisings taking place in Ethiopia. He was arrested and
[charged](http://www.nytimes.com/2013/07/25/opinion/letter-from-ethiopias-
gulag.html) with the “planning, preparation, conspiracy, incitement and
attempt” of terrorism and sentenced to 18 years in prison.

International appeals from human rights advocacy organizations have had little
effect on the case. In May, UN High Commissioner for Human Rights Navi Pillay
issued a
[statement](http://www.ohchr.org/EN/NewsEvents/Pages/DisplayNews.aspx?NewsID=14555&LangID=E)
explaining,

> The fight against terrorism cannot serve as an excuse to intimidate and
> silence journalists, bloggers, human rights activists and members of civil
> society organizations. And working with foreign human rights organizations
> cannot be considered a crime.

Additionally, seven international human rights and press freedom organizations
pressed the African Commission and the United Nations in an [urgent
appeal](https://advocacy.globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2014/05/20140503-AU-UN-Urgent-Appeal-9-Ethiopian-
journalists.pdf) to intervene in the case against Zone9. The appeal focused on
the lack of clear charges and failure to allow the defendants adequate legal
representation.

Nani Jansen, a lawyer for the [Media Legal Defence
Initiative](http://www.mediadefence.org/) and the lead signatory in the
appeal, writes in an email that both the African Commission and the UN
“operate under the cover of confidentiality in the early stages of these
matters.” She continues:

> When they follow up with a Government, this is done without informing the
> outside world. Only months and months (often over a year) later, these
> exchanges with a Government get published in the mechanism's report to its
> supervisory body.

Thus any intervention joins the rest of those in the cone of silence that is
Zone9—hidden from public scrutiny or participation.

Even if these bodies do follow up with the Ethiopian government, their
recourse is limited. In an article on the urgent appeal, Jansen
[notes](https://advocacy.globalvoicesonline.org/2014/05/03/advocates-ask-
african-commission-un-experts-to-intervene-in-zone-9-bloggers-case/) that the
African Commission can condemn the arrests in a resolution, that both
organizations’ rapporteurs can request official visits to Ethiopia to
investigate, and that Ethiopia, as a member of the UN Human Rights Council,
would be obligated to honor such a request. But even should such requests be
made, and investigations conducted, there is little chance of enforcement of
hypothetical findings on the Ethiopian government.

Since the appeal, the Ethiopian government has proceeded with charges against
the accused. The latest details on the trial can be found on the [Trial
Tracker Blog](http://trialtrackerblog.org/), a site run by people close to the
defendants.

Public attempts to highlight the Ethiopian government's transgressions against
human rights such as the #Freezone9bloggers [social media
campaign](https://advocacy.globalvoicesonline.org/2014/08/04/from-the-four-
compass-points-of-the-earth-arises-a-mighty-cry-freezone9bloggers/) have an
indirect effect. They seek to shame the Ethiopian government to ensure better
treatment for the prisoners. They also seek to pressure international
organizations and Ethiopia's allies such as the United States, for whom
Ethiopia is a critical military and security partner. The hope is that those
organizations will in turn apply political pressure on Ethiopia to free the
Zone9 defendants.

The implementation of international commitments seems to rest primarily upon a
negotiated process of politics, not a functioning and enforceable system of
law. Considering the ease with which national law in Ethiopia is employed or
ignored for political ends, it is a grim irony that only political pressure
can hope to resolve the case in their favor.

