![Free Zone9 Tumblr collage. Images used with
permission.](https://advocacy.globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2014/07/Zone9TumblrCollage2.jpg)

Free Zone9 Tumblr collage. Images used with permission.

Join Global Voices bloggers for a worldwide, multilingual tweetathon in
support of [the ten bloggers and journalists](
https://advocacy.globalvoicesonline.org/2014/04/30/netizen-report-ethiopia-
cracks-down-on-free-expression/) facing terrorism charges in Ethiopia.

The Global Voices community and our network of allies are demanding justice
for these men and women, all of whom have worked hard to expand spaces for
social and political commentary in Ethiopia through blogging and journalism.
We believe their arrest is a violation of their universal right to free
expression, and that the charges filed against them are unjust. Learn more
about their story and the campaign for their release at the Zone9 [Trial
Tracker blog](http://trialtrackerblog.org/).

The bloggers’ trial begins on August 4, 2014. Until then, and beyond, they
will need all the support they can get. So this Thursday, we as a global
community of bloggers, writers, activists, and social media experts will share
this message around the world, tweeting in our native languages at community
leaders, government and diplomatic officials, and mainstream media to draw
public attention to the case.

![Six of the detained bloggers in Addis Ababa. Photo used with
permission.](https://advocacy.globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2014/07/zone9flag.png)

Six of the detained bloggers in Addis Ababa. Photo used with permission.

**#FreeZone9Bloggers: A Tweetathon Demanding the Release of Jailed Ethiopian
Bloggers**

Date: Thursday, July 31, 2014

Time: 10am – 2pm — no matter what time zone you're in!

Hashtag: #FreeZone9Bloggers

Hosts: Nwachukwu Egbunike
([@feathersproject](https://twitter.com/feathersproject)), Ndesanjo Macha
([@ndesanjo](https://twitter.com/ndesanjo)), Ellery Roberts Biddle
([@ellerybiddle](https://twitter.com/ellerybiddle))

Want to join us this Thursday? Or help spread the word? Add your name and
Twitter handle to our [community planning
sheet](https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1aNX9ZmvUm93UxmEpSG3iSip2HBmMRY0fWBWej_1aMCA/edit#gid=0).

**Sample Tweets:**

  * @Zone9ers deserve a fair trial under international standards #FreeZone9Bloggers http://bit.ly/1g65ijg 
  * Free the @Zone9ers… because blogging is not a crime! #FreeZone9Bloggers http://bit.ly/1g65ijg
  * “We blog because we care” #FreeZone9Bloggers http://bit.ly/1g65ijg 
  * Blogger arrests in #Ethiopia are a violation of the African Charter on Human and Peoples’ Rights #FreeZone9Bloggers [http://bit.ly/QlzRuG  
](https://www.google.com/url?q=http://bit.ly/QlzRuG&usd=2&usg=ALhdy28cfibXg3-FwaVTAmY3Jm70UfLvjQ)

  * Blogger arrests in #Ethiopia violate the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights #FreeZone9Bloggers http://bit.ly/1g1MUNM

**Tweet until your fingers hurt and demand justice for the Zone9 bloggers!**

