_**This post is part of our special coverage[Syria Protests
2011](../specialcoverage/syria-protest-2011/).**_

As the [ death toll](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2011/08/07/syria-death-
toll-mounts-as-ramadan-massacre-continues/) in Syria increases, the
International Community is running out of patience and hardening its tone
against Syrian president Bashar Al Assad demanding for change and reforms.
Abroad the diaspora has also been involved actively since the beginning of the
protests in [March 2011](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2011/03/18/syria-
protests-across-the-country-6-reported-killed-in-daraa/). Almost all cities
around the world have witnessed rallies and demonstrations, some asking Assad
to leave, and others declaring their dying love for him.

From [San Francisco](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Yo9OfyYms3k) (11 June,
2011) and [Chicago](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=G5sTyNxqFVA) (July 3), to
[Washington DC ](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ROw9pbKSz28&feature=related)(
23 July), the US capital, where people chanted: ‘ _‘Leave Leave Bashar”_ in
front of the White House; almost all big cities in the US witnessed opposition
gatherings manifesting their solidarity with the people of Daraa, Homs and
Deir el Zor among others.

Here is video uploaded by
[AhmedIbnAlsham](http://www.youtube.com/user/AhmedIbnAlsham) on August 6,
where protesters where carrying a poster representing Hafez and Bashar Al
Assad and written on it: ”Like father, like son”:

Assad also has his supporters in the US like in
[California](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=UlUL6NN3ZIM&feature=related)
(April 3). Chicago too, held another pro-regime rally on [April
3](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=mbEVVFkW688&feature=related) and [June
10](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ICMUd7ALXF8&feature=related) while
defenders of the regime met in front of the United Nations Headquarters in
[New York](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=CFQhD75uvdA&feature=related) (May 1)
to assert their love to their leader.

Wave of rallies hit Latin America as well. On June 26, Syrians in Santiago,
Chile, chanted “El Pueblo Quiere Bashar el Assad” or ”The People Want Bashar
Al Assad”, as we can see in this footage by
[Zaizuni](http://www.youtube.com/user/zaizuni):

We move to Europe and start with [London (June
18)](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=kr9g_DujPU8) where Syrians called Assad an
assassin, to [Brussels](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=4I2JAXD7N-A) (July 23),
the headquarters of the European Parliament, to
[Milano](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=C46t6maqB7o) in Italy (12 and [17
July](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=DetPcpy78RQ&feature=related)). There,
potesters, it seems, are no longer satisfied with reforms or even the call for
the toppling of the regime. They want to bring it to trial.

Here's a video by Hazem Daoudi, taken in Geneva on August 6, Switzerland,
facing the UN Headquarters:

[ http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=cSi0hnR4P5c&feature=channel_video_title ]()

France which is home to a large Syrian community has been witnessing
continuous demonstrations, like in Strasbourg on
[2](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=tgC7vRgrLpA) and
[16](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ZR_Li45isBs&feature=channel_video_title)
July, and this[ two-week sit-in](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=zJYIehFQZ4Y),
facing [Place du Châtelet in
Paris](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Place_du_Ch%C3%A2telet). YouTube user
[Mesudh75](http://www.youtube.com/user/mesudh75), posts this video showing a
peaceful protest in front of the Syrian consulate and the Syrian Cultural
Center in Paris:

In Germany, people took to the streets in [Leipzig
](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=H0LUETtUOYk)(July 7),[
Berlin](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=SkT5LOPE0jM&feature=channel_video_title)
(July 23) and Bonn on [August 6](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Mj8MnMhTIaE)
and [August 8,](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=vPrmdW-1y0c) not to forget
Munich where on that same day, where this video from
[HutaafElhurriyyeh](http://www.youtube.com/user/HutaafElhurriyyeh) shows
Germans showing solidarity with Syrians and singing the Syrian National
Anthem:

Close to Munich, in Vienna, Austria, another protest took place, where this
footage was taken and posted by [AhmadSouri
](http://www.youtube.com/user/ahmadSouri)during a demo on August 9, in front
of the Syrian Embassy:

[ http://www.youtube.com/watch?feature=player_embedded&v=u5sEIwtAJqU#at=31 ]()

Anti-Bashar protests also took place in
[Ukraine](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=KtPzYpxu5qM&feature=related) (April
22) [Romania](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=7QKb4KMtOa4) (June 30),
[Russia](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=37OkdHL0pf0) (July 31) and Greece
(August 2), calling for the end of fascism:

In Turkey, protesters gathered in front of the [Iranian embassy
](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ypL9Tz0cJWY)in Istanbul on August 5,
denouncing the Islamic Republic stance towards the protest. They were joined
on August 7, by members of the [Felicity or Saadet
party](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Felicity_Party) in front of the Syrian
Consulate as we can see in this video by
[khaled111h](http://www.youtube.com/user/khaled111h):

But Assad can also rely on his supporters in Europe, who consider him as the
only guarantee for stability and security in Syria. The streets of Paris,
France, witnessed severaldemonstrations on [June
11](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=pZpwp80LZQQ
http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=pZpwp80LZQQ \() and July
[3](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=QT9uFhuoHBA) ,
[4](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=pZpwp80LZQQ) [
11](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=nMalEmFK8r0) and [12
](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=bDPoZXsUqIM).

Diaspora in
[Odessa](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=zX-4LnJtGPM&feature=channel_video_title),
Ukraine, flew balloons with the Syrian flag on June 4 for Assad. Others
marched on June 6 in [Kazan City](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=McJ_e2XuChU)
in Russia for the same reason.

Syrians in Armenia also portrayed their support to their president on March
2011:

[http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Z_i3rruF18I&feature=related](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Z_i3rruF18I&feature=related)

Despite the turmoil and unrest in the Arab world, and its own inner
revolution, its capitals were keen on showing their solidarity and compassion
with the Syrians.

This is Tunis on August 6, in a video by
[wadoodfreesyrian](http://www.youtube.com/user/wadoodfreesyrian) where people
were chanting:” Syria is Free! Bashar get out!”:

In Egypt on August 1, [OmawiTV](http://www.youtube.com/user/OmawiTV) shows
angry people following the Hama Massacre and calling for the expulsion of the
Syrian Ambassador:

<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=B8EDEOpiFlE>

In Lebanon, the situation is a bit delicate due to the complex relation
between both countries. Quite often, [opponents and loyalists of the Damascus
regime clashed ](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2011/08/05/lebanon-protest-
against-syrian-regime-attacked-by-loyalists/)and the army had to intervene to
separate both parties. The latest rally in solidarity with the Syrian people
was held on [Monday, August 8 in Martyrs Square in
Beirut](http://www.facebook.com/event.php?eid=175906009144104). This was a
gathering which was attended by a lot of intellectuals, journalists and
activists among which we note the presence of prominent Lebanese composer and
singer Marcel Khalife. You can check Mahmoud Ghazayel's photos of the event,
on
[Facebook](http://www.facebook.com/media/set/?set=a.2353732041897.2142909.1208066897).

Participants were chanting “This a shout from Lebanon – Calling for Human
Rights”:

Jordanians conducted Taraweeh, the nightly Ramadan prayers, on August 2 in
front of the Syrian Embassy as we can see in this video taken directly from
the scene of events by Basemaggad. Bassem recorded another video in [August
8](http://www.ustream.tv/recorded/16394409) too.

Similar rallies took places in the Gulf monarchies cities, like in Jeddah, in
Saudi Arabia, on August 8, where we can hear people shouting “Syria is for us
and not for the Assad Family”:

Here is another video from Jeddah at night on the same day by hama19822011:

In Kuwait ([August 5](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=QlarNSiQFmA) and 7) and
Bahrain (August [5](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=sUSNEifq4GA),
[8](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=JBp9SvKTcp4&feature=player_embedded) and 9,
protesters are demanding the expulsion of Syrian Ambassador from both
respective countries and the freezing of the bilateral ties with Damascus.
Protests were attended by several political figures and members of both
parliaments.

This video by [daraahoran](http://www.youtube.com/user/daraahoran) shows
people in Kuwait in front of Syrian Embassy, calling for the overthrow of the
Baath party.

Syrians and Bahrainis rallied in Manama on August 9, chanting _“Daraa, we're
with you, till death !”_

We conclude our round up in the Australian continent, where seems the Assad
opponents and partisans also voiced their support and vice versa.

In Auckland, New Zealand, approximately 200 people gathered in protest against
the regime for killing innocent Syrian civilians on July 30.

Demonstrations were also held in Sydney, Australia, on August 2 against the
regime:

In another demonstration in [Sydney ](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=9ixa-
IBgspU) on April 3, protested to say that ”Bashar is the best president in the
whole Middle East and the world there will be no one like him”.

Protests against the Syrian regime, are penciled in for London, Paris and
Tunis tomorrow (August 13).

_**This post is part of our special coverage[Syria Protests
2011](../specialcoverage/syria-protest-2011/).**_

Thumbnail and featured image ‘Protest to support Syrian opposition at State
Department – Berlin’, by [Thorsten
Strasas](http://www.demotix.com/photo/778604/protest-support-syrian-
opposition-state-department-berlin), copyright Demotix (06/08/11).

