_**This post is part of our special coverage[Europe in
Crisis](https://globalvoicesonline.org/specialcoverage/europe-in-crisis/).**_

After a year and a half of desperate rescue negotiations and bailout tranches
doled out by the International Monetary Fund, the European Central Bank and
the European Union, the intractable and increasingly [ineffective austerity
measures](http://www.npr.org/2011/06/15/137192576/greeks-fed-up-with-
ineffective-austerity-measures) imposed by the “troika” (three) on Greece's
socialist government, have been met with [unrelenting
protests](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/2010%E2%80%932011_Greek_protests). The
drama of the [European sovereign debt
crisis](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/European_sovereign_debt_crisis) with
Greece in its center is coming to a head, as politicians
[desperately](http://t.co/fWOzVxRQ) seek options to disentangle the European
Union from mounting debt.

[![Runner statue mocked up as a rioter. Photo courtesy of the Athens
indignants' multimedia team, licensed as CC BY-NC-ND
3.0](http://realdemocracygr.files.wordpress.com/2011/06/dsc_0073.jpg?w=600)](http://realdemocracygr.wordpress.com/2011/06/28/28062011-%CF%83%CF%85%CE%BD%CF%84%CE%AC%CE%B3%CE%BC%CE%B1/dsc-0073/)

Runner statue mocked up as a rioter. Photo courtesy of the Athens indignants'
multimedia team, licensed as CC BY-NC-ND 3.0

The [Greek indignant
movement](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2011/05/23/greece-is-it-time-for-the-
greekrevolution/), inspired by the “Arab Spring” uprisings and the [European
revolution movement](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2011/05/27/spain-from-
spanish-revolution-to-world-revolution/) that [began in
Spain](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2011/05/17/spain-thousands-of-citizens-
take-the-streets/), is centered mainly around sit-ins in public squares in
[Athens](http://real-democracy.gr/en/votes/2011-07-24-resolutions-peoples-
assembly-syntagma-square) and [Thessaloniki](http://aganaktismenoi-
thess.blogspot.com/2011/07/blog-post_3757.html). It seemingly foundered during
the summer, after a [series of violent police
crackdowns](http://www.amnesty.org/en/news-and-updates/tear-gas-fired-greek-
police-clash-athens-protesters-2011-06-29), but appeared to be picking up
steam again in September, as collective anger began boiling at the imposition
of yet another round of austerity measures following the bailout agreed at the
[emergency Eurozone summit in July](http://www.european-
council.europa.eu/home-page/highlights/a-common-response-to-the-crisis-
situation.aspx?lang=en).

**The effects of austerity**

With [youth unemployment at over
40%](http://www.time.com/time/world/article/0,8599,2081025,00.html) and
uncertainty hovering over diminishing work prospects at home, continuous
austerity has engendered a new immigration wave, this time of Greece's
brightest youth, compounding the drag on the economy by a forced and elective
[retirement rush](http://www.guardian.co.uk/business/2010/may/20/greece-brain-
drain-retirement-crisis) brought on by downsizing and raised retirement age.

Austerity itself may [constitute a human rights
violation](http://www.un.org/apps/news/story.asp?NewsID=38901&Cr=austerity&Cr1),
as a United Nations expert noted in July. The relentless cascade of austerity
measures is [taking a toll](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2011/09/29/greece-
europe-come-be-in-my-shoes-before-judging-me/) on the everyday life of Greeks,
with social services being curtailed and even the affordability of basic goods
taking a hit due to staggered VAT increases and salary, pension and benefit
cuts. A recent publication in the Lancet medical journal claims that the
crisis is also [incurring adverse health effects on the
populace](http://www.thelancet.com/journals/lancet/article/PIIS0140-6736%2811%2961556-0/fulltext),
while [suicides and criminality are reportedly
mounting](http://www.guardian.co.uk/world/2011/sep/24/greek-despair-cuts-
suicide-crime).

[![Mass 'Indignant' protest in Athens. Image by endiaferon, copyright Demotix
\(29/05/2011\).](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2011/10/Greece-Greek-
protest-375x278.jpg)](http://www.demotix.com/photo/709710/mass-indignant-
protest-athens)

Mass 'Indignant' protest in Athens. Image by endiaferon, copyright Demotix
(29/05/2011).

Creative Greeks are affected by the austerity as well, using blogs and social
media to vent their frustrations. Published blogger and copywriter Constantina
Delimitrou [paints a glum picture of the financial
insecurity](http://xpsilikatzoy.wordpress.com/2011/09/14/where-is-my-mind/)
[es] gripping the minds and bodies of Greeks:

> Οι περισσότεροι είμαστε με μόνιμες τανάλιες στα στομάχια για το περισσότερο
> μέρος της ημέρας και της νύχτας. Ένα βλαμμένο συνοθύλευμα από φόβους,
> αγωνίες, εικόνες τρομακτικές που δε θες αλλά σου σφηνώνονται στο κεφάλι και
> δε σ’ αφήνουν να πάρεις ανάσα. [..] ακούς να ρωτάνε πόσα μακαρόνια να βάλουν
> στην άκρη για μια ώρα ανάγκης, πώς θα πάνε στη δουλειά χωρίς φράγκο και πόσο
> νερό άραγε να θέλει ένα μποστάνι στο μπαλκόνι. Και εκείνη η κυρία ένα βράδυ
> στο μετρό. Που έκλαιγε για δέκα ευρώ στο τηλέφωνο. Τα παιδιά της στο
> νοσοκομείο και δεν έβρισκε δέκα ευρώ να ταΐσει τα εγγόνια. Και αυτός που
> μιλούσε δεν είχε να της δώσει. Και δεν είχα ούτε εγώ. Αλλά και να ‘χα, πώς
> να πλησιάσεις τον άλλο να τον βοηθήσεις;

Most of us have permanent pliers gripping our bellies for most of the day and
night. A stupid mess of fears, anxieties, terrifying images that stick in your
head unwittingly and won't let you breathe. […] you hear them wondering how
much spaghetti to shelve for an hour of need, how to go to work penniless, how
much water does a balcony plot need. And that lady, that night at the subway.
Crying over ten euros on the phone. Had her children in a hospital, and she
couldn't find ten euros to feed her grandchildren. The listener didn't have
any to give her. Neither did I. And even if I did, how do you approach
somebody to offer help?

[![](http://realdemocracygr.files.wordpress.com/2011/06/dsc03918.jpg?w=500)](http://realdemocracygr.wordpress.com/2011/06/14/295/dsc03918/)

Athens indignants' general assembly, 29/5/2011. Photo by Cyberela, licensed CC
BY-NC-ND 3.0

Web designer Cyberela dryly comments on her prospects as a chronic
[hemangioma](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hemangioma) sufferer:

> [@Cyberela](http://twitter.com/Cyberela/status/129579973177638912): Φυσικά
> τις θεραπείες που κάνω τώρα δεν μπορει να μου τις πληρώσει η ασφάλιση. Ο
> κόσμος με αιμαγγειωμα είναι καταδικασμένος στην Ελλάδα.

[@Cyberela](http://twitter.com/Cyberela/status/129579973177638912): Naturally,
my social security can't cover my treatments. Hemangioma sufferers in Greece
are doomed.

And actor Haris Attonis tweeted a laconic observation on migration:

> [@hartonis](http://twitter.com/hartonis/status/128373284793352192): Οι μισοί
> γνωστοί μου μετακόμισαν στο εξωτερικό. Οι άλλοι μισοί, μέσα τους.

[@hartonis](http://twitter.com/hartonis/status/128373284793352192): Half my
friends emigrated abroad. The other half, within themselves

**Police clashes**

Rampant police violence is exacerbating the social pressures. The most serious
incidents occurred when unprecedented police violence against protesters at
Syntagma square in Athens on June 28-29, was denounced by international human
rights organizations, who [noted the massive use of
teargas](http://www.hrw.org/news/2011/07/14/greek-protests-test-government-s-
commitment-rights-0) and [urged the Greek police to refrain from using
excessive force](http://www.amnesty.org/en/news-and-updates/tear-gas-fired-
greek-police-clash-athens-protesters-2011-06-29).

Indignant sit-ins, already depopulated due to summer vacations, were raided by
police at night and dismantled, with [restrictions reportedly
placed](http://parallhlografos.wordpress.com/2011/09/18/%CE%B1%CF%80%CE%B1%CE%B3%CF%8C%CF%81%CE%B5%CF%85%CF%83%CE%B7-%CE%B1%CE%BD%CE%AC%CF%81%CF%84%CE%AE%CF%83%CE%B7%CF%82-%CF%80%CE%B1%CE%BD%CF%8C-%CE%BA%CE%B1%CE%B9-%CF%83%CF%85%CE%B3%CE%BA%CE%AD%CE%BD/)
[el] in some cases to prevent future gatherings, [as happened later to sit-ins
in Spain](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2011/08/06/spain-journalist-arrested-
and-demonstrations-restricted/) and the United States. The customary prime
minister's opening speech at the Thessaloniki International Trade Fair in
September was greeted with angry [protests and
clashes](http://storify.com/asteris/greece-antiausterity-protests-in-
thessaloniki), as disparate groups converged on the heavily policed square
outside, while another emergency property tax was being announced.

**Social media usage**

[![Protest at Syntagma Square, 25/5/2011. Photo courtesy of the Athens
indignants, licensed CC BY-NC-ND
3.0](http://realdemocracygr.files.wordpress.com/2011/06/img_9607.jpg?w=400)](http://realdemocracygr.wordpress.com/2011/06/05/%CF%83%CF%85%CE%BD%CF%84%CE%B1%CE%B3%CE%BC%CE%B1-25-5/img-9607/)

Protest at Syntagma Square, 25/5/2011. Photo courtesy of the Athens
indignants, licensed CC BY-NC-ND 3.0

Twitter has emerged as a mainstay platform for citizen journalism and activism
in Greece, since the [riots over the police killing of a minor in
2008](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2008/12/10/greece-riots-in-athens-
continue/). Several activist news curators used tweet aggregation tools to
chronicle the anti-austerity protests, producing an impressive body of work.

Theodora Economides ([@IrateGreek](http://twitter.com/IrateGreek) on Twitter)
used Chirpstory to curate chronicles of most of the [major protest events in
Athens](http://chirpstory.com/id/IrateGreek), while Antonis Gazakis
([@gazakas](http://twitter.com/gazakas) on Twitter) posted daily livetweeted
minutes of the [Thessaloniki indignants’ general
assembly](http://storify.com/gazakas) on Storify.

Myrto Orfanoudaki Simic collected [videos of June 29 police
brutality](http://storify.com/cyberela/videos-from-29th-july). Meanwhile
31,000 users liked the [Facebook page of the Athens
indignants](https://www.facebook.com/AganaktismenoiStoSyntagma), while 5,000
users have liked the [Thessaloniki indignants Facebook
profile](https://www.facebook.com/aganaktismenoi.thess). Dozens of
photographers have been posting [Greek protest photoreportage work on
Demotix](http://www.demotix.com/greek-unrest) since early 2009, while
thousands of photos and dozens of videos by activists and citizen journalists
have been posted on the [blog of the multimedia team of the Athens indignants
in ](http://realdemocracygr.wordpress.com)[Syntagma
Square](http://realdemocracygr.wordpress.com) under a Creative Commons license
since these protests began.

On a humorous note, Theodora also started the [#GreekPoliticianManual
hashtag](http://chirpstory.com/li/2791), based on [Iyad El Baghdadi's Arab
Tyrant Manual](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2011/03/23/arab-world-the-arab-
tyrant-manual/), to poke fun at the ethics and practices of politicians. The
Angry Greeks vs. Angry Birds spoof, created by ToonPosers video art team, has
garnered 105,000 hits on YouTube.

Follow the Twitter account
([@GVEuropeCrisis](http://twitter.com/gveuropecrisis)) of our special coverage
project [Europe in
Crisis](https://globalvoicesonline.org/specialcoverage/europe-in-crisis/) for
daily updates on the impact of the sovereign debt crisis on Greece and other
European countries.

_**This article is part of our special coverage[Europe in
Crisis](https://globalvoicesonline.org/specialcoverage/europe-in-crisis/).**_

