**_This post is part of our special coverage[Mexico's Drug
War](https://globalvoicesonline.org/specialcoverage/mexicos-drug-war/)._**

On the afternoon of August 25, an armed squad attacked and set fire to a
casino by the name of Royale, while the location remained quite populated.
This incident, part of the violence related to the organized crime that
batters Monterrey and Mexico in general, resulted in a tragic number of 52
deaths.

[According to the newspaper
Milenio](http://www.milenio.com/cdb/doc/noticias2011/0249b7cd3a3d9540adb56c146b0bdc9a)
[es], 35 of the victims were adult, elderly women. The majority of the victims
passed away intoxicated. During preliminary investigations, police discovered
that the casino did not have adequate emergency exits (according to a number
of witnesses, [as El Universal
published](http://www.eluniversal.com.mx/nacion/188413.html) [es]).
Additionally, the casino operated illegally and had been closed down on a
prior occasion, [per
Milenio](http://www.milenio.com/cdb/doc/noticias2011/b969338e9136051cf54e4a522547155b)
[es].

The Mexican presidency [has declared a national
mourning](http://www.eluniversal.com.mx/notas/788809.html) [es] for the Casino
Royale tragedy.

[![Luto nacional por Casino Royale](https://es.globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2011/08/casinoroyale.jpg)](https://globalvoicesonline.org/?attachment_id=83094)

National mourning for Casino Royale. Photo from the Federal Government. (CC
BY-NC-SA 2.0)

Despite the presence of the army, as well as the continuous operatives and
investigative work, in 2011 the violence has escalated to new levels in
Monterrey, a city known as the country's capital of industry and technology.
The attacks in populated spaces have considerably increased: it is worth
mentioning the [attack on the Sabino Gordo bar that resulted in over than 20
victims](http://mexico.cnn.com/nacional/2011/07/08/un-grupo-armado-mato-al-
menos-a-20-personas-en-un-bar-de-monterrey) [es], along with that of Café
Iguana, a bar that hosted rock concerts, [where four people were
murdered](http://info7.mx/a/noticia/268709) [es] after a squad opened fire
from the streets.

Casino Royale is located in one of the most heavily populated areas in the
city, where three large avenues converge. The first actions following the
Casino Royale attack and fire consisted of controlling the fire, ensuring the
building's structure (which partially collapsed a day later) remained intact,
and begin rescuing bodies.

During this period of uncertainty, many family members and friends looked for
the victims through all means of communication, including Twitter, as we show
below.

NFL commentator [Fernando Von Rossum (@fvonrossum) was one of the first to
post](https://twitter.com/#!/fvonrossum/status/106920375576821760) that a
relative of his was present at Casino Royale [es]:

> Con profunda tristeza les comparto que entre las desaparecidas se encuentra
> mi tia Carmen Martinez Von Rossum en el #CasinoRoyale

It is with great sadness I share with you that my aunt, Carmen Martinez Von
Rossum, is among those who disappeared in #CasinoRoyale.

A few hours later, Von Rossum [confirmed her
death](http://twitter.com/#!/fvonrossum/status/106920375576821760) [es]:

> Lamento confirmarles la muerte de mi tia Ma Carmen M de Von Rossum en el
> ataque al #casinoRoyale Agradeceremos sus Oraciones #DiosBendicenos

I mournfully regret to confirm the death of my aunt Maria Carmen M de Von
Russum in the attack on #casinoRoyale We appreciate your prayers #GodBlessUs

Some users posted the names of their lost family members, turning to citizen
reporters like Ana Rent ([@AnaRent)](http://twitter.com/AnaRent), dedicated to
spreading timely information on precaution and assistance with respect to the
violence in Monterrey. They also supported
[#mtyfollow](http://twitter.com/#!/search/%23mtyfollow), a hashtag commonly
used by citizens to mutually share information on the attacks, crashes,
assaults and whatever other type of risk-related situation. [Edward Alexander
(@Edward_Black)](http://twitter.com/#!/Edward_Black_/status/106962538167672833)
published the following [es]:

> Aún nada de noticias sobre Jose Jaime Fuentes Oviedo. Por favor pasen este
> tweet. @AnaRent gracias de antemano. #mtyfollow #CasinoRoyale :/

Still no notice on Jose Jaime Fuentes Oviedo. Please pass along this tweet.
@AnaRent thank you in advance. #mtyfollow #CasinoRoyale :/

User @MissPalomo [also searched for a
victim](http://twitter.com/MissPalomo/status/107191084056195072) [es]:

> Por favor si alguien sabe algo de Jenny Garcia Toledano,23 años, complexión
> delgada, cabello castaño obscuro. #casinoroyale #mtysos @Cicmty

Please, if anyone knows anything about Jenny Garcia Toledano, 23 years old,
thin complexion, dark brown hair. #casinoroyale #mtysos @Cicmty

One of the victims had begun working in Casino Royale that day, [commented
Adriana Navarro
(@AdyNavarro](http://twitter.com/#!/adynavarro/status/107057636880556032))
[es]:

> @AnaRent identificamos a Ruben morales castillo, si fallecio, el viernes lo
> velaremos, tenia 19 años y era su primer dia en ese trabajo :(

@AnaRent we identified Ruben morales castillo, he died, on Friday we will hold
a wake, he was 19 years old and it was his first day of work :(

In some cases, the results were positive. [P. Odette Ledesma(@odetteledesma)
posted](http://twitter.com/#!/odetteledesma/status/106934414264647680) [es]:

> Ramiro de la Garza. 18 años de edad desaparecido en su primera salida a un
> casino, #casinoroyale. @losqueremovivos #tienennombre

Ramiro de la Garza. 18 years old disappeared on his first visit to a casino,
#casinoroyale. @losqueremovivos #tienennombre

Almost 12 hours later, the user [posted an
update](http://twitter.com/#!/odetteledesma/status/107122509723353089) [es]:

> Ya aparecio Ramiro de la Garza con vida! Ojala y encuentren a mas personas…

Ramiro de la Garza has appeared, alive! I hope they find more people…

Through Twitter, people shared methods of contact for those who had first hand
information on Casino Royale, as in the case of Lorena de la Garza
(@lorenadelagarza), who [shared a phone number through her Twitter
account](http://twitter.com/#!/lorenadelagarza/status/106934415237726208)
[es]:

> Me pasan por bb el tel de una persona que vió a la sra nora elia ortegón
> gzz. [# teléfono] plis RT p quien la busca #casinoroyale

Someone sent a phone number to my blackberry of a person who saw Ms. Nora Elia
Ortegón Gzz [# telephone number] please RT for anyone looking for her
#casinoroyale

Twitter users’ condolences have appeared over the course of the last few days,
showing a mix of desperation, profound sadness, and a helplessness as a result
of the insufficient work of the three governmental levels to control the
violence in the country. [User Ana Díaz (@MiViros)
comments](http://twitter.com/#!/MiViros/status/106895547637567488) [es]:

> El cielo #mty gris como este día, tristeza muerte personas #casino royale
> responsables la violencia y negligencia falta salidas emergencia

The #mty sky is grey like this day, sadness casualties #casino royale those
responsible for the violence and negligence lacks emergency exits

[User @ELYTIGRE35 also
comments](http://twitter.com/#!/ELYTIGRE35/status/106936460938186752) [es]:

> QUE TRISTEZA LO QUE PASO HOY EN EL #CASINO ROYALE NO HAY PALABRAS PARA TAN
> GRAN DOLOR HOY PERDI A UNA AMADA SRA. EN ESE LUGAR

WHAT SADNESS THAT WHICH OCCURRED TODAY IN #CASINO ROYALE THERE ARE NO WORDS
FOR A PAIN SO GREAT TODAY I LOST A BELOVED WOMAN IN THAT PLACE

The “they have a name” (@Tienennombre) Twitter campaign opposed the use of the
number “50 thousand” to refer to the victims of the war against drug
trafficking in Mexico and proposes to mention all of the victims by name. One
day after Casino Royale, they [began spreading the names of the
victims](http://twitter.com/Tienennombre/status/107149015090593792) [es]:

> Petra Bustos Vázquez. Víctima del ataque al Casino Royale, Monterrey, N.L.
> 25/08/11 #NoSonCifras #TienenNombre #Mty

Petra Bustos Vázquez. Victim of the attack on Casino Royale, Monterrey, N.L.
25/08/11 #TheyAreNotNumbers #TheyHaveAName #Mty

The complete list of the casualties in Casino Royale was published in the
local press, as well as in newspapers
[Milenio](http://www.milenio.com/cdb/doc/noticias2011/0249b7cd3a3d9540adb56c146b0cd818)
[es] and [El Norte](http://www.elnorte.com/local/articulo/644/1286367/) [es].
Some victims still remain unidentified. The collection of tweets from the
search for Casino Royale victims can be found on this [Storify
list](http://storify.com/hiperkarma/perdidos-en-el-casino-royale) [es].

**_This post is part of our special coverage[Mexico's Drug
War](https://globalvoicesonline.org/specialcoverage/mexicos-drug-war/)._**

