It's winter in Africa, south of the Equator, but the temperature in Malawi
feels more like Spring – particularly that of the recent Arab pedigree. The
Malawian air is rife with tension and anxiety over what is expected to be a
clash between civil society and the Malawi government on Wednesday July 20,
2011.

Civil society activists have set that date as a day for the beginning of a
series of mass demonstrations aimed at expressing their displeasure with the
Malawian leadership.

**Rife with tension**

[!['United for Peaceful Resistance Against Bad Economic and Democratic
Governance'. Image courtesy of 'DEMO YA TIYENI TONSE PA 20 JULY' Facebook
page.](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-content/uploads/2011/07/malawi-
protests.jpg)](http://www.facebook.com/event.php?eid=169916843073956)

'United for Peaceful Resistance Against Bad Economic and Democratic
Governance'. Image courtesy of 'DEMO YA TIYENI TONSE PA 20 JULY' Facebook
page.

Malawi is currently undergoing a severe fuel shortage, which began at the
beginning of June, one of a recurrent number of crippling shortages since
2009. The country has had severe foreign exchange (forex) shortages, at a time
when it is supposed to have plenty of from tobacco sales, currently in season.

On Thursday, July 14, the British Government
[announced](http://www.dfid.gov.uk/Media-Room/Press-releases/2011/Government-
to-suspend-general-budget-support-to-Malawi/) it had stopped giving budgetary
support to the Malawi government, citing concerns with the suppression of
demonstrations, the intimidation of civil society organisations, and an
injunctions bill that prevents citizens from obtaining court injunctions
against the government.

The British Government also said Malawi’s currency, the Kwacha, was
overvalued, resulting in chronic forex shortages “which are having a serious
impact on the Malawian private sector’s ability to drive future growth. There
are now daily fuel queues, tobacco exports have deteriorated and Malawi is
off-track with its IMF programme.” The IMF has also suspended its support to
the Malawi government.

The political landscape has been tense since December 2010 when the ruling
Democratic Progressive Party (DPP)
[expelled](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2010/12/21/malawi-citizens-take-on-
vice-presidents-dismissal/) the Right Honorable Joyce Banda, the country's
vice president, for what is widely believed to be a ploy for President Bingu
wa Mutharika to pave a political path for his brother, Professor Arthur Peter
Mutharika. The vice president has since formed [her own
party](http://www.nyasatimes.com/politics/malawi%E2%80%99s-vp-socialist-party-
launches-in-march.html), although officially she remains in her government
position.

President Bingu wa Mutharika has recently signed law bills that have been met
with widespread criticism and resistance, including one empowering the
Minister of Information to [ban any publication](http://www.misa.org/cgi-
bin/viewnews.cgi?category=2&id=1303122817) deemed not to be in the public
interest. A more recent law makes it impossible for individuals to obtain a
[court
injunction](http://www.nationmw.net/index.php?option=com_content&view=article&id=22790:bingu-
signs-injunctions-bill&catid=1:national-news&Itemid=3) and seek judicial
redress against the government.

The [University of Malawi](http://www.unima.mw/) has had two of its
constituent colleges, Chancellor College and The Polytechnic, [shut
down](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2011/04/14/a-blog-post-that-closed-the-
university-of-malawi/) since February 2011 when lecturers started refusing to
enter classrooms for fear of spies. The saga started in February this year
when the Inspector General of Police, Peter Mukhito, summoned a Chancellor
College political science lecturer, Dr Blessings Chinsinga, to question him
for mentioning the uprisings in Tunisia and Egypt during a lecture.

The University of Malawi governing council is currently engaged in a court
battle with the Chancellor College Academic Staff Union (CCASU), who are
challenging the Council's firing of four Chancellor College lecturers,
including Dr Chinsinga and Dr Jessie Kabwila-Kapasula, the union's acting
president.

**Fear of violent protests**

There are fears that the July 20 mass demonstrations may turn violent.
Supporters of President wa Mutharika and the DPP have announced a counter-
demonstration on the same day. There are reports that 800 police officers are
being specially trained to stop the demonstrations “with zero casualties”
according to online newspaper _[Malawi
Voice](http://www.malawivoice.com/latest-news/800-police-officers-undergoing-
special-training-to-counter-20th-july-demonstrations-as-mdf-waits-in-wings/)_.

On Thursday July 14, the United States Embassy in Malawi issued an alert to US
citizens in Malawi about about the demonstrations and the possibility that
they could turn ugly. Titled “Emergency Message for U.S. Citizens – Possible
Demonstrations”, the alert [first
appeared](http://listserv.icors.org/SCRIPTS/WA-
ICORS.EXE?A2=NYASANET;abb904c6.1107C) on the discussion site _Nyasanet_ on
Friday, and later on the online newspaper
_[Nyasatimes](http://www.nyasatimes.com/national/americans-warned-of-malawi-
demo.html)_.

One member on the _Nyasanet_ forum
[observed](http://listserv.icors.org/SCRIPTS/WA-
ICORS.EXE?A2=NYASANET;47f3ca3.1107C) that the mere fact that the US Embassy
issued such a statement meant that there was something serious brewing
underground:

> The Statement from the US Embassy means that the Chief of Station (Head of
> the CIA in Malawi) has done his/her homework. They are rarely off target.

As the air grew tense with the countdown to Wednesday, there were [reports on
Sunday](http://www.nyasatimes.com/national/zodiak-car-smashed-by-bingu-
thugs.html), which first surfaced on a Google forum, that a vehicle belonging
to _[Zodiak Broadcasting Station](http://zodiakmalawi.com/zbs%20malawi/)_ , an
independent radio station, had its windows smashed by men wearing face masks.

Much of the news of the demonstration has appeared online, whereas the
government's response has used state media with government spokespersons
holding press conferences on television and radio stations. A [Facebook event
page](https://www.facebook.com/home.php#!/event.php?eid=169916843073956) has
been created for the demonstrations with the title ‘DEMO YA TIYENI TONSE PA 20
JULY’, roughly translating as a demonstration of one and all on 20 July. As of
writing, 2,422 people have indicated they will attend the demonstration; the
date on the event's page says 20 October instead of the July 20 event that
everyone is talking about.

The Facebook page gives a detailed description of when and where people should
assemble for the demonstrations, a programme that has appeared in other
[online newspapers](http://www.malawidemocrat.com/national/programme-of-
july-20-demonstrations/) and in print newspapers. Comments on the page range
from the biblical to the profane.

A Bible-quoting commenter
[writes](https://www.facebook.com/penjani.gondwe/posts/172021052863535):

> There4,let us follow aftar the things dat mek 4 peace & things by which 1
> may edify another” Roman 14:19

One bordering on the profane
[goes](https://www.facebook.com/permalink.php?story_fbid=172046599527647&id=100000106964805):

> It's our right to demonstrate, that is the only way we can ring a bell in to
> an obstinate and gullible this stupid fool called ngwazi. Let us show him
> that Malawi does not belong to one tribe neither his family, gogogogogo!
> DEMO.

Another comment sounds rather
[militant](https://www.facebook.com/Ngwizzy/posts/172039956194978):

> It Has to be done…Malawians Stand Up and Be Counted! No One Should Abuse Our
> Hard Fought For Freedom!

A more reflective commenter
[quotes](https://www.facebook.com/permalink.php?story_fbid=171942982871342&id=100002368908313)
Nelson Mandela:

> It always seems imposible until its done-Nelson mandela.

Interest in the impending mass action appears to be spreading outside Malawi.
A Malawian landing at Kamuzu International Airport on Sunday [posted on their
Facebook
page](https://www.facebook.com/permalink.php?story_fbid=10150234330889094&id=522839093)
about a group of foreign journalists aboard the same plane they were on:

> Had a contingent of foreign media in the same flight this afternoon coming
> into Lilongwe, looks like the Demos have attracted the attention on the
> international media!” One passenger even asked a question the Malawian chose
> not to answer: “Some one asked me, is it true Malawians are changing regime
> on 20th July? I didnt give hima any answer.

But an observer of Malawian politics posted on Twitter about there not seeming
to be a lot of international media attention on the looming demonstrations:
“still nothing shows up in international news feeds on upcoming #Malawi
demonstrations #20July”.

The Twitter hashtag for the demonstration is
[#20July](http://search.twitter.com/search?q=+%2320July), says[
@chiume](https://twitter.com/#!/chiume/status/92695188207706113).

**Response from the top**

[![Uniting for Peaceful Resistance. Image courtesy of 'DEMO YA TIYENI TONSE PA
20 JULY' Facebook page.](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2011/07/malawi1.jpg)](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2011/07/19/malawi-
arab-spring-spreading-south-of-the-sahara/malawi1-4/)

Uniting for Peaceful Resistance. Image courtesy of 'DEMO YA TIYENI TONSE PA 20
JULY' Facebook page.

President wa Mutharika appears to have been aware of the mood amongst many
Malawians, and has been planning a response. On arrival from a trip to the
United States towards the end of June, he announced that he was going to give
a public lecture, in which he would address the many concerns Malawians are
expressing.

No date was set for the public lecture, but immediately as the organizers of
the July 20 demonstration announced their date, government announced the same
date of July 20 for the public lecture. Government spokesperson Honorable Vuwa
Kaunda, Minister of Information and Civic Education, and presidential
spokesperson Dr Heatherwick Ntaba held a press conference, urging Malawians
not to go to the demonstration, but to the president's lecture instead.

Among the many reasons the two cited as to why Malawians need to listen to the
president, Hon. Vuwa Kaunda performed his trademark praise song to President
wa Mutharika, listing the many achievements of the DPP-led government. Hon
Kaunda has become known for rattling off, in rapid style, President wa
Mutharika's achievements: an end to chronicle food shortages, new tarred roads
across the length of the country, six new universities being planned for the
next ten years, new parliament building, a new five star hotel and
international conference center in the capital city Lilongwe, and Nsanje World
Inland port connecting Malawi to the Indian Ocean, among others.

Up to until his re-election to a second term in May 2009, President Bingu wa
Mutharika enjoyed broad support locally, and wide admiration abroad. Civil
society activists held demonstrations in support of his policies against a
majority opposition which was seen as only bent on frustrating his development
plans. He introduced a farm input subsidy, which is credited for having turned
Malawi from a food importer to a food exporter. He was Malawi's first
president to become chairperson of the African Union for the year 2010, a
development that added to his international credentials which earned him
attention on the front pages of major newspapers in the [United
States](http://www.nytimes.com/2007/12/02/world/africa/02malawi.html),
[Britain](http://www.ft.com/cms/s/2/81059fb4-0e02-11dc-8219-000b5df10621.html)
and
[elsewhere](http://www.un.org/ecosocdev/geninfo/afrec/vol22no3/223-harvest-of-
hope.html). There was renewed hope and pride amongst many Malawians, and
President wa Mutharika was seen as the new face of a new Africa.

Compared with the mood in the country today, a lot has changed in a space of
two years. A Malawian development economist
[observed](http://listserv.icors.org/SCRIPTS/WA-
ICORS.EXE?A2=NYASANET;96c316cc.1105D) on _Nyasanet_ in May this year:

> I was at the world economic forum last month. Only two years [ago] bingu was
> a hero. Now Malawi was a source of bewilderment.

In an attempt to dissuade Malawians from attending Wednesday's planned
demonstrations, the _Malawi Broadcasting Corporation_ has carried news
bulletins, on three consecutive evenings, claiming that Malawians are being
duped about the demonstrations, whose real aim, the state broadcaster claims,
is to show support for gay rights, for which civil society groups have
received millions of kwacha. The bulletins have been saying organizers of the
demonstrations want to use photographs of demonstrators to show to donors that
Malawians support gay rights and same-sex marriages.

Reactions to the government's story have been derided as bordering on the
desperate. One reaction [posted on
Twitter](https://twitter.com/#!/Malawi2014/status/92645360350146560) said:

> Malawians urged not to listen to MBC TV & Radio on 20 July – coz of its
> tendency to misinform in news coverage

Another [tweet](https://twitter.com/#!/Malawi2014/status/92658583682031616)
sought to identify a possible irony in a television anchor's attire:

> MBC TB news anchor, Nyang'wa in a red tie – maybe in some dress rehearsal
> for the July 20 demo (dress attire is red)

On February 14 earlier this year civil society organizations planned a
demonstration to protest against fuel shortages, but it was stopped by police.
According to online newspaper _Malawi Voice_ , the demonstrators were hugely
[outnumbered by the police](http://www.malawivoice.com/latest-news/malawians-
not-keen-on-fuel-protest-police-out-number-protesters/), who were over 250,
against a few dozen protesters, numbering about 30, according to print
newspaper _[The
Nation](http://www.nationmw.net/index.php?option=com_content&view=article&id=14460:malawi-
police-foil-fuel-protest&catid=1:national-news&Itemid=3)_.

The leader of that foiled demonstration, Mabvuto Bamusi, has since made a 180
degree turn. He is now frequently invited on national television to provide
analysis and commentary that supports government and lambasts his former
colleagues in civil society.

