_Global Voices bloggers[have been
commissioned](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2013/03/27/global-voices-at-oecd-
global-forum-on-development/) to liveblog the [OECD Global Forum on
Development](http://www.oecd.org/site/oecdgfd/) in Paris on April 4-5, 2013.
Leading up to the meeting, our team is submitting posts about development
issues that help serve as weekly [online discussion
topics](http://www.oecd.org/site/oecdgfd/discuss.htm) on their website
([#OECDgfd](https://twitter.com/search?q=%23oecdgfd))_

[![Thatched roof Mali](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2013/03/straw-roof-
mali-375x281.jpg)](http://www.flickr.com/photos/jmdesfilhes/324713083/)

Preparing a new thatched roof in Mali. Photo by Jean-Marc Desfilhes on flickr
(CC BY-NC-SA 2.0)

As Western economies struggle with rising debt and unemployment, their
approach to development and cooperation with low-income countries and emerging
markets has taken a twist. It is becoming more clear that sustainable
development should not be based on external wealth or redistribution, but must
instead be generated at home.

Foreign investment and remittances have long been identified as a crucial
source of revenue for poor populations in countries like Mali or Cape Verde.
Entire villages have been built out of remittances in Mali, for instance,
mainly from immigrants to France. However, this does not mean that these
countries are being helped to develop sustainably.

For most African countries, the positive ability to attract capital is often
negated by lenient fiscal policies towards foreign investors that strip
countries of public revenues to build up their economies. This trend seems was
still on the rise worldwide in 2007 according to an OECD report [“Tax Effects
on Foreign Direct Investments”](http://www.oecd.org/tax/tax-
policy/39866155.pdf).

A [report by Matthew Martin and Nils
Bhinda](http://intranet.iiec.unam.mx/node/4496?page=0%2C0%2C1) from
Development Finance International shows that in Tanzania, for instance, the
influx of private capital from global mining companies increased the volume of
gold and diamonds sales. However, this failed to produce the expected social
benefits, such as increased government revenues or public investment in social
infrastructure. In fact, various tax exemptions and fiscal incentives ended up
[ costing Tanzania $140 million USD](SOURCE?) from 2005-2008.

**Remittances: Money at what cost?**

A [ growing number of poor households worldwide are subsisting on
remittances](http://web.worldbank.org/WBSITE/EXTERNAL/NEWS/0,,contentMDK:23058070~pagePK:64257043~piPK:437376~theSitePK:4607,00.html),
according to the World Bank. Still the question remains: can these seemingly
successful flows of migrants and money secure sustainable development and
reduce poverty in the most affected countries?

Remittances from abroad to Mali amounted %3.7 of the countries GDP for the
year 2005-2006, and according to [some
estimates](http://siteresources.worldbank.org/INTTRADERESEARCH/Resources/544824-1323963330969/8322197-1323963839213/Gubert_Lassourd_Mesple-
Somps_ppt.pdf) remittances significantly decreased the number of poor in Mali
and also reduced inequality. Cape Verde is another nation that has seemingly
[benefited
](http://www.boston.com/news/local/massachusetts/articles/2009/04/26/cape_verde_rising_with_emigres_help/)
from emigration as the country with the [highest per capita
remittances](http://www.macauhub.com.mo/en/2012/05/31/cape-verde-receives-
most-remittances-from-emigrants-per-capita-of-any-african-country-in-2011/) of
any African country. With remittances amounting to 8% of the country's GDP, it
has even overcome the challenge of establishing banking institutions for the
poor on its many islands thanks to [ financial capital from migrants
](http://www.bos.frb.org/commdev/c&b/2003/fall/unbanked.pdf) in Portugal,
Brazil and the USA.

Because of such statistics, many international development institutions have
attempted to [design development
policies](http://dilipratha.com/index_files/G8Berlin.pdf) based on remittance
flows, by trying to convert this “subsistence” money into capital for
infrastructure. There are some caveats to consider though.

Despite the growth of remittance flows, one should keep in mind that the very
concept of remittances originates from a major outcome of global poverty:
economic migration. Those who choose to leave their country are often exposed
to [risks and dangers during the
transition](http://apps.who.int/gb/ebwha/pdf_files/EB122/B122_11-en.pdf)
(illegal border transfer, human traffickers, social and cultural isolation).

Moreover, remittances from migrants are highly dependent on the economic
growth of the host countries. When unemployment in host countries rises, it
frequently affects the [type of labor available to most
immigrants](http://wes.sagepub.com/content/24/2/337.abstract), putting both
them and families back home at further risk of precariousness.

Finally, the peer-to-peer nature of remittances is both a blessing and a
curse. As Hein de Haas writes in [an article for Third World
Quarterly](http://www.heindehaas.com/Publications/de%20Haas%202005%20-%20Migration,%20Remittances%20and%20Development%20-%20Myths%20and%20facts%20-%20TWQ%2026\(8\).pdf)
in 2005:

> The much-celebrated micro-level at which remittances are transferred is not
> only their strength, but also their main weakness, since this also implies
> that individual migrants are generally not able to remove general
> development constraints.

Because of the lack of incentives for locally-produced added value, it appears
that remittances based on value created abroad can never be the sole base of a
sustainable development strategy for low income countries.

**Good measures for sustainable development**

There are some measures that can be implemented to support foreign direct
investment and remittances towards a more sustainable world.

First, transparency and accountability. With respect to foreign investments,
governments should offer proper projections of the benefits for public
finance, or projects should not be allowed to take place. Financial policies
should encourage a permanent check and balance system for both private and
public flows with an obligation of transparency for the source of the revenues
and their further use. Transparency, in [the form of regular and mandatory
publications to civil
society](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2012/05/02/africa-calls-for-
transparency-over-marked-increase-in-land-deals/) should be mandatory.

Low income countries often resort to the setting up [Industrial Free
Zones](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Free_trade_zone) (IZF) to spur
industrialization and create jobs in strategic locations with mineral
resources. The creation of these zones have often led to economic and social
instability through a constant race to lower costs, geographical mobility and
low-quality production. Therefore if a government chooses to implement an IZF,
it should also plan for a rapid conversion of labor and production capacity to
evolve with markets.

This concept is all the more important because so far there has been no
concerted effort to integrate local products of low income countries and
services in global trade. Inter-regional trade should remain the main goal
because it provides geographical proximity and reduces vulnerability to the
whims of highly mobile multinational companies.

With respect to migration and remittances, a drawback of global inequality is
the tendency of qualified students from low income countries to remain in
richer countries to pursue careers, a phenomenon also known as the “[brain
drain](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Brain_drain)“. As the recession takes its
toll on employment in Western countries, a “[reverse brain
drain](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Reverse_brain_drain)” effect has emerged
for Nigeria, Ghana, Morocco and other countries where there are competitive
salaries and working conditions.

It would make sense for policymakers worldwide to start to embrace a simple
idiom to ensure sustainable development: the creation of wealth through added
value and redistribution must start at home. Policies based on short term
incentives, social inequities or external wealth injection might spur growth
temporarily, but it is doubtful that they will sustain poverty reduction in
the long run.

