[![Seed by theogeo](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2009/11/2548747212_0c8088813f.jpg)](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2009/11/2548747212_0c8088813f.jpg)

    Seed by theogeo

  

<http://www.flickr.com/photos/theogeo/> / [CC BY
2.0](http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0/)

The [Alzar las Voces ](http://alzarvoces.wordpress.com)(Raise the Voices)
project in Nicaragua brings farmers in rural communities the possibility to
speak out through video telling of their concerns, their projects, their
wishes and ideas.

There are six organizations in Matagalpa, Nicaragua who are working on this
project including [women's](http://fumdec.org/)
[collectives](http://www.cmmmatagalpaorg.net/), [Matagalpa Organization for
the Blind](http://discapacidad.ca/ocmlb/), [farmer ](http://www.addac.org.ni/)
[organizations ](http://www.unag.org.ni/matagalpa/)and an [information center
for Sustainable Development](http://simas.org.ni/) with the aid of
[Simas](http://simas.org.ni/). The website is part of a project which will
serve to showcase the work these organizations are doing with the members of
the community by having members of the rural communities speak about their
life, concerns and interests.

In [this next video](http://alzarvoces.wordpress.com/2009/08/24/rescatando-
las-semillas-criollas/), Marcial Gonzalez, a promoter of the Farmer to Farmer
program, explains how the program has helped them: first, they learned they
shouldn't burn their lands to clear them, how to build or grow ditches and
barriers to help control erosion. Another lesson they've learned is the
importance of saving and keeping seeds from national varieties of plants,
since they are ideal to grow in their environment and why trees should be kept
and not cut down, since they provide oxygen, shade and maintain the water
sources.

Juana Urrutia, [in another
video](http://alzarvoces.wordpress.com/2009/11/11/promotores/), explains what
it means to be a community promoter. A Promoter is in charge of a group or
community, protecting the community's interests, be it in fieldwork,
production or socially. They also transmit knowledge which they received
during workshops or activities, since it is their responsibility to put into
practice what they have learned within their communities.

Martha Elena Montenegro is a beneficiary of the credits and programs to help
women start their own businesses. She makes some products using materials she
harvests from her farm, however, after all the effort, she now has to pay back
her loans, and she uses the [video
medium](http://alzarvoces.wordpress.com/2009/05/21/%C2%BFcomo-distribuyo-mis-
ganancias-para-pagar-credito/) to ask how she should best distribute her
earnings in order to be able to pay back her loan.

