There are a lot of night runners out there. More so then you might imagine,
and the popularity seems to be increasing.

[![](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2011/06/Mid-375x225.jpg)](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2011/06/26/japan-
night-running-as-a-sub-culture/mid/)

One of the huge reasons that brings the runner out after dark is the sake of
convenience. It goes to show that night hours are attractive to working people
when you hear about the impressive turnout at a recent night race at Osaka
Castle.

Kiyoshi in Osaka [participated](http://finishline42195.cocolog-
nifty.com/blog/2011/05/post-0dfb.html) in a Night Run at Osaka Castle:

>
> さて、この大会ですが、平日の夜に開催されるということで、人が集まるんかいな？と最初は思っていましたが、会社帰りの方その他、計560名の方が参加されました。  
>
> 大阪城公園内とはいえ、平日の夜に5km、10kmでタイムを計測してもらえるということで、いろんな事情で日曜日のレースに出づらい方や、レースは全く初めてという方などが気軽に参加されたのではないかと思います。

Now, this competition was going to be held at night on a weekday, so I first
thought: “Will people really show up?” However, a total of 560 people
participated after hours. Even though it was inside Osaka Castle Park, we were
able to have times recorded for 5km and 10km races. I think the people who
usually have trouble entering a race on Sunday or had never entered a race
before found it quite easy to participate.

Then there is the alluring atmosphere the night brings. Some people feel at
ease in the night environment and the conditions are usually favorable for
running.

Carna [explains](<a href=) what she likes about it:

> 空は雲に覆われている為、月明かりはなく、街も節電中の為、薄暗い中でのランニングとなりましたが  
>  逆に走りに集中できたのではないでしょうか  
>  夜のランニングはホントに気持ちが良いですね！  
>  日焼けもしませんし

Due to the sky being covered by clouds, the lack of moonlight and the town
being on energy-reserve, the running was a bit gloomy. On the other hand, It
seemed like I was able to concentrate on my running. Running at night really
feels refreshing and you don’t have to worry about getting sunburned!

There is even a distinct night runner fashion that is developing. Lafino
[tried out](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=-qh9cWeAkrM) a jacket with LED
lights, made especially for night runs and walks.  

We have noted the attractiveness of night running from recreational aspects,
but what of it as a genuine culture that defines people and their relationship
to society?

Running is not something people usually associate with night-life or sub-
cultures, but the members of the group [Midnight Runners Tokyo
(MRT)](http://midnightrunners-tokyo.com/) do. They have been hitting the
streets of Tokyo at the dead of night on weekends; a time when the idea of
running would be unthinkable to many people. They see night running as culture
in the making, rather than a sport.

The organizers of the group have some ambitious plans for MRT. GV Japan talked
with one organizer, Shogo Otani, about the idea behind the late-night event
and where it’s going.

> Where did you get the idea for MRT?

There was a feature in Huge Magazine about a group called New York Bridge
Runners. The members of the group run at night, so Huge called them Midnight
Runners. We wondered if we could bring midnight running to Tokyo, so with the
start of 2011 we launched MRT.

> What is the purpose of MRT?

MRT is intended to be a trend for modern Japan that will lead to a running
counterculture. Its attractiveness does not come from its style or looks, but
simply from the state of being free, so it will spread a kind of hippie-
mentality for the 21st century. The point is to express the idea of “being
free” through running.

> How does running through the streets of Tokyo make you feel?

I really feel alive. I feel that I am alive in Tokyo and I realize the
importance and enjoyment of having friends.

> How many people would you like to join the event? Why?

7 billion. That’s the kind of number we need to shoot for in this day and age.

> How many times a year would you like to hold the event?

We are shooting for 2 times a month, or 24 times a year. In the future
participants will be able to get involved with the planning of events. If we
can successfully hold an event, the number of times we do it will increase.The
current unofficial goal is to do it every week; the official goal is to do it
every month.

> How many official members do you have?

We have two coordinators, one webmaster and one copywriter. That’s all. We are
currently looking for a photographer and an art director. Once those members
have been selected the organization will be fully operational.

> What makes MRT more important (worthy of media attention) then Bridge
> Runners?

Bridge runners is something that defines individuals. Basically, it was born
from a will directed within, therefore people spontaneously came together. MRT
is something that defines a culture. Basically, it was born from a will
directed to the world. Hence, 7 billion. It is concerned with ideas and
communication therefore, it’s something different that just street culture. An
intellectual component is necessary.

> What is the goal of the event?

The essential idea of MRT is “freedom.” Through the spreading of this idea,
through every connection, the goal is to continually create new culture. It is
a goal with no end.

