If you are among the thousands of people heading to Copenhagen this December
for the [United Nations Climate Change Summit](http://en.cop15.dk/), chances
are you will encounter a group of men and women from Denmark, Kenya, Tanzania,
Uganda, Zimbabwe, and Zambia, dressed in red suits.

They are the [Climate Debt Agents](http://climatedebtagents.com), and their
job is to get the ~~Danish government~~ industrialized countries, including
Denmark, to pay their “climate debt” to the developing world. If you are in
Denmark, and would like to don a suit and join them, you can [apply
here](http://www.ms.dk/sw144645.asp). You can also visit them [on their
blog](http://climatedebtagents.com/) or on
[Facebook](http://www.facebook.com/pages/CLIMATE-DEBT-AGENTS/155243087381).

**Who pays the price?**

When rich countries make decisions that have negative affects on the
environment, people living in poverty pay the highest price. Drought, hunger,
and death caused by climate change could be prevented in many places with
technology like water storage facilities that can help communities
[adapt](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Adaptation) to new climate conditions.

But that costs money.

[“Who should pay the climate debt?”
[PDF]](http://ms.dk/graphics/ms.dk/dokumenter/andre_politikomr%e5der/climate%20finance%20briefing%20in%20template%20may%202009%20final.pdf)
is the title of a short report by the international anti-poverty organization
[ActionAid](http://actionaid.org) that calculates the monetary value of the
debt at €135 billion per year until 2020, and proposes how the bill should be
divided between countries.

Over the past 3 months, [MS ActionAid Denmark](http://www.ms.dk/sw13950.asp)
has educated a team of online and offline activists to help deliver their
message, by sending them on research missions to
[Kenya](http://climatedebtagents.com/?p=635),
[Brussels](http://climatedebtagents.com/?p=615) and Denmark, and pairing them
up with Global Voices bloggers who [mentored them virtually for 6
weeks](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2009/09/08/global-voices-bloggers-
mentor-new-danish-and-african-bloggers/) on blogging.

On their website, the mentees-turned-debt-agents explain: “We want a world
with climate justice and global justice. In order to get that the attitude of
decision makers has to be changed so that they recognize and realize to pay
off their climate debt.”

