In a world of fragmentation and religious division, a unique and much
anticipated document will be released to the world on November 12, after
months of collaborative work online and offline by diverse religious leaders
and great thinkers.

In February 2008, [Karen
Armstrong](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Karen_Armstrong), a former Roman
Catholic nun who refers to herself as a “freelance monotheist”, won [the TED
prize](http://www.tedprize.org/about-tedprize), which is awarded annually to
three exceptional individuals who each receive $100,000, and more importantly,
the granting of “One Wish to Change the World”.

[TED](http://www.ted.com/) stands for Technology, Entertainment, Design and
started out (in 1984) as a conference bringing together people from those
three worlds. Since then its scope has become even broader.

![logo](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2009/11/logo-300x111.png)Karen Armstrong who is
[considered](http://www.ted.com/pages/view/id/162) as one of the most
provocative, original thinkers on the role of religion in the modern world,
said her wish was to create a [Charter for
Compassion](http://charterforcompassion.org/learn/), a document about the core
shared value of every world religion and moral code: the “Golden Rule”. This
is how she described it to the TED community:

> “I wish that you would help with the creation, launch and propagation of a
> Charter for Compassion, crafted by a group of leading inspirational thinkers
> from the three Abrahamic traditions of Judaism, Christianity and Islam and
> based on the fundamental principles of universal justice and respect.”

**A collaborative process**

Global participation in an open writing process was the critical starting
point for the creation of the Charter for Compassion. The submissions shared
began a conversation that continues as the Charter is finalized and launched
at <http://www.charterforcompassion.org>. People from all over the world have
contributed to this Charter; it transcends religious, ideological and national
difference; it has been composed by leading thinkers from many traditions with
passion, insight, intellectual conviction and hope.

_The Council of Sages_ for the Charter for Compassion includes notable
thinkers and faith representatives such as Sheikh Ali Gomaa (the Grand Mufti
of Egypt), Rabbi David Saperstein (Religious Action Center of Reform Judaism),
Sadhvi Chaitanya (spiritual leader of the Arsh Vijnaya Mandiram ashram), and
Archbishop Desmond Tutu (retired Archbishop of Cape Town, South Africa).

  
[Charter for Compassion Trailer](http://vimeo.com/6859038) from [TED
Prize](http://vimeo.com/user991996) on [Vimeo](http://vimeo.com).

Among the Charter’s partners around the world include TED, Tanenbaum Center,
World Council of Religious Leaders, the Al-Ghazzali Center, The Institute of
Religion, Culture and Peace among others.

Across the world [more than 170
events](http://charterforcompassion.org/share/events/) are planned to help
launch the Charter for Compassion (You can [host your
own](http://charterforcompassion.org/share/participate-in-an-event/) too). The
unveiling of Charter has already sparked lots of enthusiastic support followed
by conversations across the global blogosphere.

**Perspectives on the Charter for Compassion**

Malaysian Journalist _Niki Cheong_ [wrote in his
blog](http://www.nikicheong.com/blog/time-for-compassion-the-charter-is-
unveiled-today.html), “Malaysians were invited to stop by a studio to record
what compassion means to them to create a viral video to promote Nov 12 –
today – when The Charter of Compassion will be unveiled.”

_Aizat Faiz_ [blogged](http://blog.aizatto.com/2009/11/06/participating-in-
the-malaysian-chapter-of-the-charter-for-compassion/) about his experience of
participating in the filming of the Malaysian Chapter of the Charter for
Compassion. _Rantings by MMs_
[reported](http://rantingsbymm.blogspot.com/2009/11/compassion-and-
constitution-concerns-of.html) that in Malaysia ‘the launching of the charter
will be officiated by YAB Tun Abdullah Ahmad Badawi. In the afternoon there
will be a youth panel followed by an interfaith panel.’

Jewish and interfaith _Tikkun Daily_ in the United States
[urged](http://www.tikkun.org/tikkundaily/2009/11/10/karen-armstrong-wants-
you-to-teach-compassion/), “all should take the opportunity to remind those
around you of the power of compassion and to think of ways to use compassion
to transform and heal the world.”

_Sujato's blog_ about Buddhism
[wrote](http://sujato.wordpress.com/2009/11/05/charter-of-compassion/): ‘We
all need to do our bit to use religion to respond creatively and
constructively to our environment, making it a force for helping rather than
hurting, fostering love and inclusiveness, not alienation and ignorance.’

_360 Digital Influence_ , a blog of the Ogilvy Public Relations firm,
[explores the question](http://blog.ogilvypr.com/2009/11/is-compassion-
viral/), ‘if Compassion is “viral”?’

_Brian Carnell_ in the United States wrote some [counter
arguments](http://brian.carnell.com/articles/2008/the-golden-rule-is-still-
not-much-of-a-moral-principle/) about the Golden Rule at the center of the
Charter, calling it “wishy washy feel good nonsense” that doesn't help solve
“real moral dilemmas”.

