[![Berlin Wall by Natalie Maynor](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2009/11/127094076_0624cc7780-300x214.jpg)](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2009/11/127094076_0624cc7780.jpg)

Berlin Wall by Natalie Maynor

Today is the [20th anniversary of the fall of the Berlin
Wall](http://www.mauerfall09.de/), a complex security structure that once
divided East and West Berlin in Germany. Today we are showcasing some of the
videos from throughout the globe that are being uploaded to commemorate this
date and what it meant to barriers not only in Germany, but throughout the
world.

In Germany, a series of giant domino pieces crafted out of foam were erected,
to be toppled down to mark the end of the Cold War. [This video by NoCommentTV
](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=rsDNfQqnET4)shows the dominoes, which were
[painted by children in
Germany](http://www.spiegel.de/international/germany/0,1518,615014,00.html)
and [also by artists living in other areas where there are divisions and
walls](http://www.heiditrautmann.com/category.aspx?CID=2676368777), being set
up. This other video's embed option has been disabled, but you can view how
the dominoes were toppled by [clicking this link to see it on its YouTube
page.](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=0y5eGXy_laQ)

In [Colombia](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=hDCHrnZdwcs), students reenact
the fall of the wall, by taking turns to demolish a concrete slab:

From Germany, domino toppling fan
[Annodomino2007](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=dKLiooarpkA) has uploaded his
own domino tribute to the fall of the wall, and also to the 10 year
anniversary celebration which kickstarted his passion for dominoes:

[In the USA](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=UF_o1KYQIWU), college students
erected a replica of the Berlin Wall that could be written on, as a way to
raise awareness:

From Mexico, [VarinVxx uploads a
video](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=kffLolfYcfU) featuring another wall that
is still standing, in: _Is not Berlin, is not Palestine is US Mexico border
The Wall of Shame in USA_ :

[  
Krista Schyler ](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=cGpVyCovo70)also makes the
comparison between the Mexico/US wall and the Berlin wall, in this case, not
only focusing on the impact on human migration, but from a wildlife
conservation angle as well:

This pilot for a [documentary by
Ziashere](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=7QeaIChuJ4c) showing s other walls
that are still standingIn this pilot, one in Ireland:

This last video is 2 years old, but is still relevant:[
adamfilmaker](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Pu4OztB_Zyo) interviewed youth
both from the North and South of the Nicosia wall in Cyprus, a green zone
patrolled by UN blue helmets that divides Turkish Cypriots and Greek Cypriots,
earning the distinction of being the[ last divided capital of the
world](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Nicosia).

[Image by Natalie Maynor
u](http://www.flickr.com/photos/nataliemaynor/127094076/)sed on post according
to Creative Commons Attribution License.

