[![threatened-logo](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2009/11/threatened-
logo-1.gif)](https://threatened.globalvoicesonline.org/)

Never before have so many people been threatened or imprisoned for what the
words they write on the internet.

As activists and ordinary citizens have increasingly made use of the internet
to express their opinions and connect with others, many governments have also
increased surveillance, filtering, legal actions and harassment. The harshest
consequence for many has been the politically motivated arrest of bloggers and
online writers for their online and/or offline activities, in some tragic
cases even leading to death. Online journalists and bloggers now represent
[45% of all media workers](http://cpj.org/imprisoned/cpjs-2008-census-online-
journalists-now-jailed-mor.php) in prison worldwide.

Today, [Global Voices Advocacy](https://advocacy.globalvoicesonline.org) is
launching a new website called [Threatened
Voices](https://threatened.globalvoicesonline.org) to help track suppression
of free speech online. It features a world map and an interactive timeline
that help visualize the story of threats and arrests against bloggers
worldwide, and it is a central platform to gather information from the most
dedicated organisations and activists, including [Committee to Protect
Bloggers](http://www.committeetoprotectbloggers.org), [The Arabic Network for
Human Rights Information](http://www.anhri.net/en/), [Reporters without
Borders](http://rsf.org), [Human Rights Watch](http://hrw.org), [CyberLaw
Blog](http://cyberlaw.org.uk/), [Amnesty
International](http://www.amnesty.org/), [Committee to Protect
Journalists](http://www.cpj.org/), [Global Voices
Advocacy](https://advocacy.globalvoicesonline.org).

[![threatened_voices](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2009/11/threatened_voices1.jpg)](https://threatened.globalvoicesonline.org/)

**What blogger, where?**

Finding accurate information about arrested and threatened bloggers and online
writers is difficult for several reasons.

First, the secrecy surrounding online censorship and repression makes it extra
difficult to be accurate. Not a single week passes without stories of arrests
of yet another online journalist or activist in countries like Egypt or Iran,
but the details and reasons are often shrouded in mystery.

Second, there is still some confusion about the definition of a “blogger”.
Professional journalists are increasingly migrating to online media and blogs
in pursuit of more freedom, blurring the old lines of definition. And many so-
called cyber-dissidents in China, Tunisia, Vietnam, or Iran, do not have
personal blogs. Other times, bloggers are arrested for their offline activity,
rather than for what they have published online.

This confusion has sometimes made it hard for online free speech advocates to
come up with a good strategies and partnerships to defend bloggers and online
activists, but it has never been more important to try.

**Let's work together**

At [Global Voices](https://globalvoicesonline.org) we engage a community of
authors, editors, and translators, who help keep us all informed of free
speech and human rights abuses. With [Threatened
Voices](https://threatened.globalvoicesonline.org/) we aim to [open the
process of reporting](https://threatened.globalvoicesonline.org/submit) up
even further to any person who has information.

We're calling on those whose friends, relatives, colleagues, or compatriots,
have been threatened to help
[create](https://threatened.globalvoicesonline.org/submit) and update the
profiles of those missing or under arrest, so we can seek additional sources,
verify, and link to online campaigns dedicated to freeing them.

In the process, we are hoping to learn more about when, where, and to what
extent bloggers are being subjected to abuse in different countries, so we can
share that information widely with journalists, researchers, and activists,
and work towards creating an internet where everyone can exercise their right
to speak freely, and where bloggers in prison are not forgotten.

**Help spread the word. Tweet, blog and update your facebook status
about[Threatened Voices](https://threatened.globalvoicesonline.org/)!**

