We bring you the 5 winning videos for the UN contest where participants sent
in a video stating what they would tell world leaders if they had the chance.
The 5 video bloggers had the opportunity to give their message in person at
the UN Day celebration in New York City.

[In a previous post ](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2009/09/25/video-contest-
citizen-embassadors-for-the-64th-un-day/)we announced the UN Citizen
Ambassador contest where video bloggers had to record what they would say to
World Leaders if they had the chance, to effectively win the opportunity to
speak directly with Secretary-General Ban Ki Moon at the UN Day on October
23rd. The winners were chosen and notified through YouTube as well, and [here
is the video announcement](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=2z7vvvQrtAM) by the
United Nations Channel:

Emily Troutman from the USA, who [we recently wrote
about](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2009/09/12/video-caring-about-congo/) in
relation to her Congo Matters video, was one of the winners. In [her UN video
response](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Zo3gydiUy64), she spoke about how
World Leaders should remember that they are responsible for more than 6
billion of other human beings, one person at a time:

[Jeremy Walker of Canada ](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Fx9n1yVD2eE)was
another winner, who asked the UN to prove that it still can help solve
worldwide problems, to return hope to those who still want to believe that
there can be change:

[  
Breno Coelho from Brazil](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=RR_toVxuuco) uploaded
a video answering what is needed to be done to make this world a better and
safer place, where it is answered by many different people, all offering their
solutions: more love, less greed, less hate:

[Maricarmen Ortega of Mexico ](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Xj532Q-iVmo)also
included the voices of many in her video, this time in several different
languages:

[Kirsty Matthews of Canada ](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=IUCR_f4E1l0)had a
short message, straight to the point: what is needed is equality,
sustainability and justice for all:

United Nations TV uploaded a video showing the 5 Citizen Embassadors in NYC at
the UN Day:

Congratulations to all!

