[![Image by daquella manera](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2009/10/2044749780_4ade9e2e3f-300x225.jpg)](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2009/10/2044749780_4ade9e2e3f.jpg)

**Do all pregnant women deserve equal human rights, or do pregnant women in
prison forfeit those rights?**

There are a few questions that come to mind regarding a pregnant woman's right
to live and to raise her child when she has been convicted for some sort of
crime:

  * What is it like for them to be pregnant and have their child behind bars?
  * Should they be a priority when there are other women outside of correctional facilities without medical assistance?
  * Should maternity overrule any other legal conditions to ensure a pregnant woman's human rights?

**USA: women in labor no longer to be shackled.**

Could you imagine a woman giving childbirth with her hands in handcuffs and
her feet shackled to the bedposts? [Malika Saada
Saar](http://www.rhrealitycheck.org/user/malika-sadaa-saar), founder and
executive director of the [Rebecca Project for Human
Rights](http://www.rebeccaproject.org/), [ tells
us](http://www.rhrealitycheck.org/blog/2009/10/06/in-labor-and-in-chains)
about this practice which still happens in the United States of America, where
pregnant women serving time have been routinely shackled during labor and
childbirth as a common practice in some correctional facilities, even though
it is dangerous for the health of both mother and child. Following is a [video
interview](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=CWj1uHdxnt8) included in the same
article written for _RH Reality Check_ , an online community on sexual and
reproductive health and rights which does information and analysis for
reproductive health:

**What happens to an inmate's baby after childbirth?**

Different countries have different regulations regarding children in prisons.
For example, in Argentina, according to _Ajintem_ , an information portal for
migration information, a[ law was
passed](http://portal.ajintem.com/archivo/80-argentina-prision-domiciliaria-
para-embarazadas-y-madres.html) last year specifying that pregnant women,
women with children younger than 5 and those with handicapped children would
benefit from spending their prison term at home under house arrest. This law
would benefit not only the mother, who in prison wouldn't receive suitable
health care during her pregnancy, but also the child, who would either be
raised in an unsafe environment deprived of freedom with deficient health
controls and food, or be raised away from the mother, causing another series
of problems. However, the message is for magistrates to follow the spirit of
the law and grant this permission to those women not involved in violent
crimes, to ensure that the rest of the civilian population doesn't see
pregnancy as a get out of jail free card.

In the Canary Islands, according to the _Prisiones y Penas_ blog, which writes
about the issues surrounding jails and prisons, women are allowed to [keep
their children of up to 3 years of
age](http://prisionesypenas.blogspot.com/2009/09/detenidas-con-hijos-en-
carceles.html) with them in their cells, but in the company of other inmates,
which isn't the best environment. Thus, pregnant women or women with children
under 3 are told upon entry to the prison that it isn't good for the child to
grow up behind bars, and options are given for them to send the child off to
family members. This is also the case in
[Peru](http://www.reuters.com/article/worldNews/idUSTRE5085ZV20090109) and
[Russia](http://russiatoday.com/Top_News/2009-07-27/russia-s-prison-born-
children-marked-for-life.html). In the US, there are only two correctional
facilities which allow for this, in New York and in Nebraska, [as told by
renowned photographer Jane Evelyn Atwood
](http://www.amnestyusa.org/women/custody/toomuchtime/pt_02/e_moms.html)in her
3 part photo documentary for __[_Amnesty International_ , called _Too Much
Time_ ,](http://www.amnestyusa.org/women/custody/toomuchtime/) where she
visited dozens of prisons all over the world to record and document the lives
of inmates.

Why does the US correctional system not generally allow women with babies to
keep them? Atwood explains that due to the hostage situation, it is not
allowed. In the [_Prison Photography Blog_ they address this
claim](http://prisonphotography.wordpress.com/2009/10/07/women-behind-bars-
jane-evelyn-atwoods-too-much-time/):

> Children are excluded from all but a couple of US prisons. The security
> threat is cited as the reason: a child inside a prison is a constant
> vulnerable life and constant hostage target. The claim seems a little bogus
> when penal systems of other countries are brought into consideration.

The Atwood documentary in the _Amnesty International_ site features both a
section on the process of giving birth in shackless as told in [Vanessa's
Baby](http://www.amnestyusa.org/women/custody/toomuchtime/pt_02/f_vanbab.html)
and another on prison systems and[
motherhood,](http://www.amnestyusa.org/women/custody/toomuchtime/pt_02/e_moms.html)
with fotographs of the women while the photographer reads an essay on her
experiences visiting the prisons and taking the pictures.

**Pregnancy as a bargaining tool?**

Why are rights for pregnant women in prison so controversial? In _Russia
Today_ , a Russian broadcasting channel, [the subject is
mentioned](http://russiatoday.com/Top_News/2009-07-27/russia-s-prison-born-
children-marked-for-life.html) when discussing children born and raised in the
Russian correctional system:

> Skeptics think some mothers deliberately get pregnant simply to ease life in
> prison. Hospital leave, then lots of scheduled time with your child – it is
> all better than sitting in a stone cell, they claim.

And there are women for whom it seems that pregnancy is the only way to escape
a sentence, as was the case back in June, when a British woman incarcerated
and sentenced to death in Laos due to drug smuggling got pregnant in prison
and escaped being executed, since the Laos government would not execute a
pregnant woman. The[ claims
made](http://www.dailyexpress.co.uk/posts/view/105278/No-firing-squad-for-
girl-who-fell-pregnant-in-jail) according to the _Daily Express_ , a British
newspaper, are that she got artificially inseminated “to secure a more lenient
term”.

**In their words: Women tell of their children and prison life**

Geraldin Rodríguez, an Argentinean spending time in an Ecuadorian jail due to
drug trafficking tells [Marcos
Brugiati](http://marcosbrugiati.blogspot.com/2009/07/carcel-de-mujeres.html),
a writer who contributes with the art related online publication _[Plastica-
Argentina](http://www.indexarte.com.ar/noticias/562/las-rejas-de-la-carcel-el-
arte-de-la-espera.htm)_ , the story about acting and performing in jail,
getting pregnant in prison and having her child. She was allowed to keep her
baby with her, but decided that the child needed to grow up free:

> “Decidí que salga para vivir, tenía miedo que sufra de grande los traumas
> que hoy tengo. Se lo llevó al año mi hermano quien se hice cargo con su
> esposa”.

I decided he should leave to live, I was afraid he would suffer the same
traumas I have today. After a year my brother took him away and is caring for
him along with his wife.

Juvinete is [ in a Spanish
prison](http://www.nortecastilla.es/20080908/vida/quedarse-embarazada-prision-
irresponsable-20080908.html), and was pregnant when she was incarcerated for
drug trafficking. She tells her story to regional Spanish newspaper
[_NorteCastilla_](http://www.nortecastilla.es/20080908/vida/quedarse-
embarazada-prision-irresponsable-20080908.html). Three years after giving
birth to her baby in prison, her child had to leave her side, and was sent to
a foster family. Juvinete sees her daughter every 15 days and every two months
she gets a 2 week leave to spend time with her. However, things don't seem to
be looking up: there is a chance Juvinete will be deported to her natal
Brazil, and she fears for the consequences this change would have on her
child. She does have advice for any woman who decide to get pregnant while in
jail:

> -Intento convencerlas para que no se queden en estado dentro porque ver a un
> niño privado de libertad es muy duro, es irresponsable. Ellos no tienen que
> pagar nuestros errores.

I try to convince them not to get pregnant while inside because seeing a child
deprived of their freedom is very hard, it's irresponsible. They don't have to
pay for our mistakes.

In _[Woman and Prison](http://www.womenandprison.org/motherhood/kebby-
warner.html)_ , a website dedicated to visibilizing women's experiences in the
correctional system, inmate [Kebby Warner speaks of her own
pregnancy](http://www.womenandprison.org/motherhood/kebby-warner.html) while
doing time in a US prison, and how she was treated during her pregnancy, labor
and afterwards, when her child was taken away from her. Here is an excerpt
where she writes about the birthing process:

> During the labor, no one is allowed in the delivery room. My family didn't
> even know I was in labor or had her until after I left the hospital. During
> the three days some of the guards stayed in the room, but most of the time,
> when the nurses asked them to sit outside the door, they complied. I have
> heard horror stories of women being chained to the delivery bed. I am so
> grateful as to have not experienced this. Most of the nurses treated me as a
> human instead of a prisoner.

You can read more testimonies about growing up with a parent in prison and the
different effects incarcerating women may have on their children [in Women and
Prison.  
](http://www.womenandprison.org/motherhood/index.html)

So what do you think? With pregnant women around the world not receiving
health care of any sort, should additional efforts be made to benefit women
who are in prison? Is there a difference between mothers serving terms in
correctional facilities and those outside? Should they be treated differently?

_  
Image used to illustrate post is “17 de noviembre” by[daquella
manera.](http://www.flickr.com/photos/daquellamanera/2044749780/)_

