[![baby by gabi_menashe](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2009/10/babyfeet-75x75.jpg)](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2009/10/babyfeet.jpg)

baby by gabi_menashe

When a woman dies during pregnancy, childbirth or due to complications after
delivery, it affects not only the family, but also the whole community. These
videos, by different human rights organizations, go beyond statistics to tell
us the stories of women and their families as they struggle to understand why
it is that so many women are dying during childbirth and what needs to be done
to stop this.

First, the [White Ribbon
Alliance](http://www.whiteribbonalliance.org/index.cfm) produced a four minute
video titled [Birth and Death
](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=VrH7945NhNk)explaining the seriousness of
Maternal Mortality and how it can be stopped:

UNICEF also created a [two minute
video](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=-2z7NH0yxCw) to raise awareness about
this issue, with 5 steps that can be taken to diminish maternal mortality:
education, respect, empowerment, investing and protection.

In this next video, [_In Silence: Maternal Mortality in
India_](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=U1bBYfC8Mf4)by [Human Rights
Watch](http://www.hrw.org/), photographer Susan Meiselas and reporter Dumeetha
Luthra traveled to India to follow the story of a woman who died after giving
birth:

In Peru, as told by [this piece done for CARE by Phil
Borges](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=WOy4Nj5V-mk), the _Watchmen for Lives_
program to decrease maternal mortality has proven to be a success: by
empowering and educating women from within the communities in the importance
of healthcare during pregnancy and by making a chart for midwives with warning
signs on when to send women to a clinic â€“ so more are going to clinics to give
birth, dramatically reducing the numbers of deaths due to complications during
labor.

Amnesty International has this documentary piece, 18 minutes long, about
[Maternal Mortality in Sierra
Leone](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=oHjwc4a57Vo). One in 8 women die in
Childbirth there: the inability to pay for medical attention, a practically
non-existent healthcare system, lack of trained medical practitioners and
understaffed and understocked clinics are the main reasons. As the women in
the video tell: everyone there knows a woman who has died during pregnancy or
labor.

And from Australia, students from the Nursing and Midwife program at the
University of Sydney have created Birthing Kits that they've delivered to
developing countries to try and prevent unnecessary deaths. It includes a
plastic sheet to put under the mother, surgical gloves, scalpel blades, gauze,
soap and string to tie off the umbilical cord. [In the
video](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=t7plsQvAo8E), they tell of their
initiative and the successful experience they've had in Bangladesh.

