An increase in taxes was approved by the Chamber of Deputies of Mexico to be
enforced in 2010, which will include the Special Tax on Products and Services
(or IESPS for its initials in Spanish) that will add a 3% tax to Internet and
cable services.

A month earlier, as part of the discussions of the IESPS taxes, the Public Tax
Administration Secretary, Agustín Cartens, recognized that half of the money
spent on telecommunications belonged to 20% of the richest households in the
country, [according to a story by Mexican magazine Proceso
[es]](http://www.proceso.com.mx/noticias_articulo.php?articulo=72148). He
stated that since rural and public telephony services are exempt from the
IESPS, citizens in difficult economic situations would not be affected by the
tax. However, those low-income families that do use these services at home
will be hit harder because of the assumption that the Internet is a luxury
only used by those able to afford the service. With these words, the Mexican
electronic community condemned the idea of Internet as luxury and began their
protest on Twitter with the hashtag
[#internetNecesario](http://twitter.com/#search?q=%23internetnecesario)
(“Internet is a Necessity”) with great urgency because the final debate and
vote started on October 20. The law was passed in the early morning on October
21.

[![Photo by Mark Schoneveld and used under a Creative Commons
license.](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2009/10/internet.jpg)](http://www.flickr.com/photos/magdalenus/2142584328/)

Photo by Mark Schoneveld and used under a Creative Commons license.

The protest movement displayed the importance of Internet to Mexicans, and
received coverage from national television and newspapers, as well as from
high-audience blogs, such as [_Boing
Boing_](http://www.boingboing.net/2009/10/20/mexico-net-advocates.html). The
Twitter service [_WhatTheHashtag_](http://wthashtag.com/Internetnecesario)
estimates that the protest has gathered around 35,000 tweets from more than
7,000 participants.

These are some of their comments on Twitter.

[MexiComunicado @mexicomunicado
[es]](http://twitter.com/mexicomunicado/status/5038817742):

> Me voy a ir a finlandia a twittear haya [sic: allá] es un derecho y me
> cuesta 3% menos hacerlo #internetnecesario

I’m going to Finland to tweet, [because] over there it is a right and it costs
3% less

