[Trafigura](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Trafigura), the world’s third largest
independent oil trader, has [finally released the UK's _The Guardian_
newspaper from a secret
injunction](http://www.guardian.co.uk/world/2009/oct/17/trafigura-minton-
report-revealed) preventing it from reporting the so-called Minton Report
[[PDF at this link](http://image.guardian.co.uk/sys-
files/Guardian/documents/2009/10/16/mintonreport.pdf)].

After a strange week of battling between Trafigura's lawyers from the firm
[Carter-Ruck](http://www.carter-ruck.com/) and _The Guardian_ , and a week of
terrible publicity for the company, Trafigura finally gave in and said the
preliminary report could be made public.

The draft study contains details of waste dumped in Abidjan, Côte d'Ivoire, in
2006 – and evidence of its chemical components, and their potential effect.

The injunction banned _The Guardian_ from reproducing or reporting the Minton
Report which was already available on
_[Wikileaks.org](http://wikileaks.org/wiki/Category:Trafigura)_ and the
Norwegian media (maybe elsewhere, too). The order was obtained by lawyers
Carter-Ruck on behalf of its client Trafigura.

> “No newspaper can reveal the contents of this report, but at least we can
> now say that it exists and has been rendered secret. The option of
> ‘publishing and be damned’ is not available.” [[ _The Guardian_ ,
> 14.10.09](http://www.guardian.co.uk/commentisfree/2009/oct/14/parliament-
> free-speech-trafigura)]

But until last week no-one, except those it involved, knew that the injunction
existed and that _The Guardian_ could not report the order. **Why?** It's one
of many existing secret injunctions, which not only ban reporting a story but
also the existence of the ban itself.

The only reason we know about it now, is because of one British member of
parliament (MP), [Paul
Farrelly](http://www.theyworkforyou.com/mp/paul_farrelly/newcastle-under-
lyme). As _Private Eye_ , a UK magazine famous for its investigative
journalism and its disdain for Carter-Ruck, a leading media libel litigation
firm, [said this week on its website](http://www.private-
eye.co.uk/sections.php?section_link=hidden_2&issue=1246), Farrelly's
“intention was to test this [conspiracy of silence](http://www.private-
eye.co.uk/sections.php?section_link=hidden_3&issue=1246) [i.e. secret ‘super
injunctions’] by asking questions about it in Parliament”.

**How?** [Because MPs are protected under the Bill of Rights of
1689](http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/uk_politics/82536.stm), which declares that
“freedom of speech and debates or proceedings in Parliament ought not to be
impeached or questioned in any place or court outside Parliament.”

Therefore an MP's comments can be published without fear of legal action ([a
fuller history at this
link](http://timesonline.typepad.com/timesarchive/2009/10/how-the-press-won-
the-right-to-report-on-parliament.html\))). But _The Guardian_ knew that to
reproduce [Paul Farrelly's
question](http://www.publications.parliament.uk/pa/cm200809/cmordbk2/91014o01.htm)
(below, tabled in Parliament, see point ii.) would contravene the existing
order. So it contacted Carter-Ruck to see if they could change the terms of
the injunction. “We were advised by Carter-Ruck that publication would place
us in contempt of court,” stated _The Guardian_.

Carter-Ruck meanwhile maintained that _The Guardian's_ account was
‘misleading’. Its full statement [can be found at this PDF
link](http://www.carter-ruck.com/Documents//Trafigura-
Press_Release-13.10.2009.pdf). The lawyers acting on behalf of Trafigura said
they would take further instructions from their clients, but _The Guardian_
published its article first.

A very comprehensive account of the extraordinary activity online [can be
found on the _Online Journalism
Blog_](http://onlinejournalismblog.com/2009/10/13/trafigura-guardian-gagging-
order-parliament/) but to sum it up:

  * After the Guardian posted an account stating that it was not able to report a Parliamentary question that was publicly available without mentioning any details at all, an online frenzy whipped up, with several bloggers working out what the question in question was. The notion that journalists could not report Parliament shocked readers of _The Guardian's_ article – both its critics and fans.
  * Twitter users and blogs willfully ignored the injunction – if its possible to ignore a secret injunction – and passed on links and keywords connecting Trafigura and Carter-Ruck to Paul Farrelly's question, and even the Minton Report. At one point, for example, [#Trafigura](http://twitter.com/search?q=%23Trafigura) was the top trending topic on Twitter – globally.
  * So although the Guardian had still not reported the question or broken the terms of the Order, all the information contained in Farrelly's question was out there. _The Guardian_ intended to go to court to fight the Order, but Carter-Ruck said it would no longer try to prevent his publication reporting MP Paul Farrelly’s parliamentary question about Trafigura. “The parties have now agreed to an amendment to the existing Order so as to reflect that,” Carter-Ruck reported in its statement.
  * _The Guardian's_ editor, Alan Rusbridger, [who tweeted](http://twitter.com/arusbridger) sporadic updates, said the firm had “caved-in” and the paper finally reported Farrelly's question. _The Guardian_ , and other mainstream media, praised social media for its role in applying pressure throughout the day.

Simply put – whether defiant online users were the reason Carter-Ruck agreed
to vary the order or not – Paul Farrelly's question could not be suppressed
online. And what's more, thousands of people who had never heard of Trafigura
now knew its name and its connection to a toxic waste scandal.

Then, later in the week Carter-Ruck suggested debate could be blocked in
Parliament [by claiming that the secret injunction it had obtained is “sub
judice,”](http://www.guardian.co.uk/uk/2009/oct/15/carter-ruck-trafigura-
parliament-injunction) ie. in active legal proceedings. If proved, it would
prohibit any motion, debate or question concerning the matters going ahead,
under Westminster rules.

A day later the Minton Report injunction was lifted in the British press.

Before, journalists could only say it existed, nothing more. And that's what
was really controversial here.

Because the report is all to do with the dumping of waste in West Africa.

For background on the waste dump in the Côte d'Ivoire in 2006 please read this
commentary on _Journalism.co.uk_ : [‘The journalist and NGO collaboration to
expose Ivory Coast toxic waste
dump’](http://blogs.journalism.co.uk/editors/2009/10/13/the-journalist-and-
ngo-collaboration-to-expose-trafigura-toxic-waste-dump/). For more detailed
information on events themselves, visit [_The Guardian's_ section on Trafigura
and the Probo Koala. ](http://www.guardian.co.uk/world/trafigura-probo-koala)

Further information on the Trafigura-Guardian story [can be found in the
_Journalism.co.uk_ blog updates at this
link.](http://blogs.journalism.co.uk/editors/tag/carter-ruck/)

