The Constitutional Reform process continues in the [Dominican
Republic](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dominican_Republic), and the recent
approval of Article 69 has been creating controversy. This article establishes
the following: “The high streams of rivers and the endemic, native, and
migratory biodiversity zone are to be especially protected by the public
powers to guarantee its management and preservation as fundamental property of
the Nation. The national rivers, lakes, lagoons, beaches, and coasts belong to
the public domain and are to be freely accessible, always when it respects the
right of private property. The law will regulate the conditions, standards and
easements in which individuals will access the enjoyment or management of
these areas.”

[![Photo by Rocío Díaz](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2009/10/beach.JPG)](http://accioncomunitaria.blogspot.com/2009/10/palos-
ciegas.html)

Photo by Rocío Díaz

The second part of the Article, which talks about the free access to beaches
when the right to private property is respected, has been the subject of
protest from the population, which believes that it is undermining their right
to go to beaches where there is private investment, in other words, hotels,
clubs or other infrastructure. [Newspapers
[es]](http://diariolibre.com/noticias_det.php?id=217712), blogs, and
television programs have been interpreting it that way, turning the issue of
free access to the beach into a cause for protest in this media, as well as
Twitter and [Facebook, where a group was created to urge to not allow the
privatization of the beaches
[es]](http://www.facebook.com/group.php?gid=155573861407), as many are afraid
that this decision makes it possible.

Manuel Moisés Montás of the blog _Toy Jarto [es]_ [explains the origin of this
fear](http://toyjarto.com/2009/10/02/dominicanos-en-luto-rechazamos-la-
privatizacion-de-las-playas-dominicanas-digamos-un-no-rotundo-a-la-involucion-
constitucional):

> Una vez reconocidos los derechos de apropiación y explotación a título
> exclusivo de las playas dominicanas, es de esperarse que algunos
> particulares (gente con dinero) procedan a adueñarse de las que resulten más
> hermosas, mejor ubicadas o idóneas para la explotación turística, relegando
> así al grueso de la población a playas de segunda o tercera categoría que,
> andando el tiempo, no tardarán en deteriorarse con motivo de la afluencia
> masiva de personas huérfanas de recursos para ir a bañarse en las playas
> privatizadas.

Once the rights of appropriation and exploitation of the exclusive Dominican
beaches are recognized, it is only to be expected that some people (those with
money) begin to take possession of the most beautiful beaches at the best and
most suitable locations for tourist use, relegating the population to second
or third-class beaches, in time, which won't take long to deteriorate because
of the massive influx of people low on resources to go to the privatized
beaches.

Despite the negative reaction to Article 69, many others are reminded that the
access to beaches where hotels are located have always been restricted, but
now the difference is that it is established in the Constitution. Some are
even defending the idea that access to these beaches should be regulated.
Enedina Pereyra of the blog _Bracuta [es]_[ calls on the Dominicans that are
protesting to put themselves in the shoes of the
businesspersons](http://bracuta.blogspot.com/2009/10/la-playa-es-tuya-mia-o-
de-todos.html) that have developed a beach by cleaning it and transforming it
into a ideal vacation spot. At the same time, Pereyra makes a graphical
comparison between a private and a public beach, with an emphasis on the
average poor manners from Dominicans who visit the beach.

There have been so many protests over Article 69 that the [National
Association of Hotels and Restaurants [es]](http://www.asonahores.com/)
(ASONAHORES for its initials in Spanish) has clarified one point in a public
communique on September 8 in a national newspaper, when it stated that the new
Article represents progress because it establishes a balance between the use
of natural patrimony and the right to private property. Despite these
statements, since October 8 there have been protests, with the largest one
taking place on October 9 in front of the National Congress by young people
wearing beach clothing and signs saying “This is Not My Constitution,” and
which is a message that has also been found on many walls in the cities of
Santo Domingo, Santiago, and others.

The protests that have arisen are supported by a large part of the population,
including young and old and from different social classes, including the
authors from the blog _Ahí e’ Que Prende [es]_ , [who see the protests as an
impulsive action](http://ahiequeprende.com/2009/10/08/constitucion-que-ha-
dado-de-que-hablar) based on the poor interpretation of a text that only backs
something that has already been taking place with beaches located at hotel
complexes: restricted access for their guests. Despite this, the team from the
_Ahí e’ Que Prende [es]_ blog recognizes that there have been abuses with the
current Constitutional reform.

Translated from Spanish by Eduardo Ávila

