Tunisia is gearing up for its presidential elections on October 25. The
election campaign started on October 11, but not all political parties and
politicians are able to join the fray. One of those parties is Attajdid (The
Renewal), whose posters were absent from the elections banners. The party has
also been prevented from starting its election campaign. And if this is not
enough, the authorities have censored the party’s mouthpiece “Attariq Al
Jadeed” (The New Way) without a convincing reason as explained by blogger
[Sofiene Chourabi ](http://tunisiesocio-
democatique.blogspot.com/2009/10/149.html):

حجزت مصالح وزارة الداخلية العدد 149 من جريدة الطريق الجديد بجمع كلّ الأعداد
الموجودة بالمطبعة مساء السبت 10 أكتوبر وإشعار صاحب المطبعة بحجز العدد بدعوى
تضمنه للبيانين الانتخابيين لحركة التجديد في حين أنه مؤرخ يوم 10 أكتوبر أي قبل
انطلاق الحملة الانتخابية وهي تعلات واهية باعتبار أن العدد كان بصدد الطبع مساء
السبت 10 أكتوبر ليوزع على الأسواق ابتداء من يوم الأحد 11 أكتوبر الذي تنطلق فيه
الحملة الانتخابية.

On the evening of Saturday October 10th, the Interior Ministry seized issue
number 149 of “Attariq Al Jadeed” newspaper. This was done by collecting all
the printed issues in the printing press and by informing its owner that the
confiscation is due to the fact that the issue contains the two electoral
manifestos of “Attajdeed “ party with the October 10th date whereas the
electoral campaign starts in October 11th. These arguments are nonsense as the
issue was being printed on Saturday October 10th in order to be distributed on
Sunday October 11th , the day when the electoral campaign starts.

On the other hand, the pictures of the candidate of the ruling party –
Tunisian president [Zine El Abidine ben
Ali](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Zine_El_Abidine_Ben_Ali) – were everywhere,
and sometimes illegally. He also made several appearances on TV to promote his
campaign, and that is not allowed as stated in the electoral code. [_Kisses
from Tunisia_](http://bons-baisers-de-tunisie.blogspot.com/2009/10/blog-
post_1281.html) wrote about this and showed pictures from the electoral code
and pictures of the ruling party candidate campaigning for his party on a
private TV channel.

