The International Film and Alternative and Community Video Festival called
“[Ojo al Sancocho [es]](http://www.festivalojoalsancocho.org)” was recently
organized by the company Sueños Film Colombia (Dream Films) and its second
edition took place September 18-25, 2009 in [Ciudad
Bolívar](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ciudad_Bol%C3%ADvar,_Antioquia) in
Southern Bogotá. During the week, Colombian audiovisual projects gathered to
talk about topics, such as Latin American and local identity, and Web 2.0, as
a way to create practical communities.

[Sancocho](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sancocho) is a traditional soup that
can be found throughout Colombia and made with many ingredients. Festival
organizers used the analogy of the soup to show how the week attracted many
different individuals and organizations all contributing their own ideas to
the event.

[![Photo of Festival workshop by Yuliana Paniagua of Convergentes and used
with permission.](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2009/10/ojo.jpg)](http://www.flickr.com/photos/25077437@N07/3966942509/)

Photo of Festival workshop by Yuliana Paniagua of Convergentes and used with
permission.

Cuba was the special invited guest, and representatives from the [Festival of
Cine Pobre [es]](http://www.cubacine.cu/cinepobre/index.html) in Cuba spoke
with admiration about the activities taking place in Colombia. There was also
reflection on different topics, aesthetics, and creativity. Community and
alternative groups also displayed their productions with the shared objective
to create images that differ from those shown by traditional media. The
festival's [official blog [es]](http://festivalojoalsancocho.wordpress.com/)
has additional information about the presenters, as well as the calendar of
activities throughout the week.

The blog from _Tal TV [es]_ writes that this community initiative was created
from “the need to democratize the audiovisual culture in Colombia” and
[summarizes the philosophy behind the
Festival](http://www.tal.tv/blog/index.php/2009/09/17/ojo-al-sancocho-
sept-18-al-25-de-2009) that attracted participants from Colombia, as well as
Spain, Cuba, and Argentina:

> El festival Ojo al Sancocho, promueve nuevos realizadores y productores
> audiovisuales de Ciudad Bolívar, de Bogotá, de Colombia y de Latinoamérica,
> comprometidos con un audiovisual educativo-cultural, informativo y
> estimulante, que promuevan la identidad latinoamericana, pluriculturalidad y
> los valores de libertad, solidaridad, paz y justicia.

The Ojo al Sancocho Festival promotes new directors and audiovisual producers
from Ciudad Bolívar, Bogotá, Colombia, and from Latin America, committed to an
educational-cultural, informative, and stimulating audiovisual work, which
promotes Latin American identity, pluriculturality, and the values of freedom,
solidarity, peace, and justice.

The blog _Idealistas [es]_ [writes about the background of the company Sueños
Films Colombia](http://www.idealist.org/if/colombia/es/h/blog/-vamos-al-
sancocho-), the event organizer:

> Sueños Films ha editado alrededor de 40 documentales y 4 largometrajes,
> entre los que se encuentran “Corazón de Ciudad Bolívar” de Felipe Ávila,
> ganador del premio al Mejor Argumental Local 2008, emitido por Caracol
> Televisión, y “El Alma de los Sueños”, producido por los niños que integran
> los talleres de EKO, la escuela audiovisual de la fundación.

Sueños Films has edited around 40 documentaries and 4 feature-length films,
among them “Corazón de Ciudad Bolívar” (Heart of Ciudad Bolívar) by Felipe
Ávila, winner of the prize for the Best Local Short Film 2008, awarded by
Caracol Television and “El Alma de los Sueños” (The Heart of Dreams) produced
by the children who take part in the EKO workshops, the foundation's audio-
visual school.

Participants in the Ojo al Sancocho festival took part in a wide variety of
programming and were well-received by the residents of Ciudad Bolívar. After
the final activity, the basic conclusion revolved around the need to construct
a solid network in which all of the local initiatives that are being created
converge in order to strengthen the audiovisual processes that are taking
place around the country.

Translation by Eduardo Ávila

