Puerto Rico is getting ready for the [national
strike](http://www.primerahora.com/diario/noticia/gobierno_y_politica/noticias/muchas_rutas,_un_solo_paro_nacional/337158)
on Thursday, October 15. Since governor Luis Fortuño [layed-off about 17,000
government employees](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2009/10/02/puerto-rico-a-
crisis-with-many-names/) the first week of October, there has been tremendous
mobilization from different sectors of the civil society: workers and members
of trade unions, women, environmentalists, students, and professors, among
others. There have been multiple demonstrations and acts of civil disobedience
to protest the economic policies that the government has assured are necessary
due to the financial crisis. In total this year, the recently elected
government has laid off around 25,000 public employees.

In the last months hostility has grown [between the government and different
civil society groups](http://dialogodigital.com/node/2997): [eviction
orders](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2009/08/11/puerto-rico-the-battle-over-
public-lands/) in socially and economically disadvantaged communities, police
brutality, and the dismantlement of community initiatives such as the
Fideicomiso del Caño Martín Peña. There have also been a string of comments
from government officials considered offensive and insensitive, such as the
now sadly famous [“such is
life”](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2009/08/28/puerto-rico-such-is-life/),
and more recently, when the Governor's designated Chief off Staff Marcos
Rodríguez Ema [compared demonstrators to
terrorists](http://www.google.com/hostednews/epa/article/ALeqM5gkWTKYJndodkR98WWm7Jlj-
in8Xw). This is the context of the national strike on Thursday. In response to
this comment, Tito Otero has posted a video of a boy playing the violin in
front of the Congress. We can hear the boy say: “I am not a terrorist. I
believe in justice for my country.”

Bloggers and twitterers are getting ready for the strike which aims to
paralyze the country for one day. In [_Cargas and
descargas_](http://edwinvazquez.blogspot.com/) [ES] Edwin Vázquez has covened
bloggers and citizens to use [Twitter](http://twitter.com) and
[Facebook](http://www.facebook.com/) to circulate information the day of the
national strike. Already, the people at @caribnews are asking followers for
hashtag suggestions, and the conversation has started under #twittericans.

