![Blog Action Day](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2009/10/bad-125-125.jpg)More than 9000 bloggers are devoting a
post to climate change today as part of [Blog Action
Day](http://www.blogactionday.org/), an annual initiative started by
Change.org to unite the world's bloggers in reaching their millions of
readers.

[Register your blog ](http://www.blogactionday.org/en/blogs/new)to add your
voice!

This is the Global Voices entry.

Over the next couple of months Global Voices is going to be following
environmental and climate change issues extra closely. We're hoping to amplify
unheard voices in the debate around the United Nations meetings in Copenhagen
in December ([COP15](http://en.cop15.dk/)).

In November, on [_Conversations for a Better
World_](http://www.conversationsforabetterworld.com/), a blog sponsored by the
[UNFPA,](http://unfpa.org/) two of our authors, Eduardo and Belen, are going
to be cross-posting stories about population dynamics and climate change. I
know they'll be looking towards Latin America.

Throughout October, Global Voices bloggers have been mentoring [31 young men
and women from Africa and Denmark](http://globalchangenow.net/) who are
organizing an online campaign under the[ auspices of MS
ActionAid](../2009/09/08/global-voices-bloggers-mentor-new-danish-and-african-
bloggers/) in Copenhagen, Denmark. They've asked us to relay stories about
‘what developing countries need to help correct damage from climate change’.
So we'll try to do that too.

**Some mentor entries**

For Blog Action Day, Jillian [encouraged her
readers](http://jilliancyork.com/2009/10/15/blog-action-day-09-climate-
change/) to visit the blog of her mentee
[Edith](http://globalchangenow.net/ejanver/), while Ali says his mentee
[Peter](http://globalchangenow.net/claver/) turned the tables on him and
[inspired him to write a post on climate
change](http://blog.novruzov.az/2009/10/it-is-blog-action-day-2009.html).

Another mentor, Gayle, has written [a longer
post](http://gisforghana.blogspot.com/2009/10/climate-change-in-ghana-blog-
action-day.html) highlighting the situations of farmers in Ghana, Australia
(her own countries) and Zimbabwe (her mentee
[John](http://globalchangenow.net/john/)‘s country).

Gayle [used Twitter](http://twitter.com/gaylepescud/status/4575319227) to put
the call out for farmers in Australia. To her surprise, she was re-tweeted by
ABC Radio in Australia, and came directly in touch with several farmers by
email. She read interviews with Ghanaian farmers online, and even spoke to one
directly.

And among dozens of links and interesting sources, Gayle found information on
how local communities use traditional knowledge in rural Ghana [to cope with
climate change](http://grou.ps/par_cc/talks)[.](http://grou.ps/par_cc/talks)

Gayle did something that bloggers on Global Voices do all the time. She went
looking for voices you rarely hear speaking for themselves in international
mainstream media.

**In the past week on Global Voices**

Bhumika Ghimire wrote a post today about the [future of bio-gas in
Nepal](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2009/10/15/nepal-bio-gas-revolution/),
including a video by a Japanese university research team that shows how bio-
gas is used in rural Nepal.

[![A landslide caused by Typhoon Ketsana in a village in Pampanga province.
Photo by Flickr user susancorpuz90](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2009/10/landslide-300x199.jpg)](http://www.flickr.com/photos/susandesignstudio/3977100156/in/set-72157614614099992/)

A landslide caused by Typhoon Ketsana in a village in Pampanga province. Photo
by Flickr user susancorpuz90

Earlier this week, Mong Palatino[ wrote about how Filipino
bloggers](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2009/10/12/philippines-typhoon-
disasters-and-climate-change/) are drawing connections between climate change
and the devastating floods in Manila that killed more than 500 people.

Saffah Farooq wrote about how citizens of the low-lying Indian Ocean island
state of the Maldives, [feel their fate may be
decided](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2009/10/11/maldives-gearing-up-for-
copenhagen/) by the success of treaties like the Kyoto Protocol.

Wildlife blogger Samuel Maina in Kenya, wrote about how Kenyans are so
desperate for rain they are[ awaiting El Niño rains
](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2009/10/08/kenya-waiting-for-el-nino/)that
may displace thousands with mixed feelings.

There is a constant flow of stories on Global Voices’ [environment topic
feed](https://globalvoicesonline.org/-/topics/environment/) by bloggers all
around the world.

**Looking ahead**

On this Blog Action Day, where we celebrate the collective power of bloggers
to push for change, we'd like to encourage everyone not only to write about
climate change but also to read what other people are saying.

Over the next many weeks, we're going to be overwhelmed by news stories by
journalists quoting politicians, activists, and many others – but when the UN
meetings are over and the cameras are off, the people who face the
consequences of climate change immediately, will _still_ be telling their
stories on the internet in hopes of reaching people who care.

As we say at Global Voices, ‘The world is talking. Are you listening?’

For those far removed from the front lines of climate change, listening and
linking is one the few ways we can succeed to make the problem feel real and
in need of solutions today.

**Related posts**

  * [Blog Action Day 2009: Rising Voices Projects Discuss Climate Change](https://rising.globalvoicesonline.org/blog/2009/10/15/blog-action-day-2009-rising-voices-projects-discuss-climate-change/ "Permanent link to Blog Action Day 2009: Rising Voices Projects Discuss Climate Change")
  * [Posts in Portuguese on Blog Action Day ‘09](../2009/10/16/post-in-portuguese-on-blog-action-day-09/ "Posts in Portuguese on Blog Action Day ‘09")
  * [Greek Posts on Blog Action Day ‘09](../2009/10/15/greek-posts-on-blog-action-day-09/ "Greek Posts on Blog Action Day ‘09")
  * [Africa discusses climate change](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2009/10/19/africa-discusses-climate-change/)
  * [Caribbean: Blogging About Climate Change](../2009/10/16/caribbean-blogging-about-climate-change/ "Caribbean: Blogging About Climate Change")
  * [Israel: Blog Action Day for the Environment](../2009/10/16/israel-blog-action-day-for-the-environment/ "Israel: Blog Action Day for the Environment")
  * [Morocco: Blogoma participates in Blog Action Day](../2009/10/16/morocco-blogoma-participates-in-blog-action-day/ "Morocco: Blogoma participates in Blog Action Day")
  * [Ghana: Blog Action Day '09](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2009/10/19/ghana-blog-action-day-%E2%80%9909/)
  * [Global Health: Can Condoms Combat Climate Change?](../2009/10/16/global-health-can-condoms-combat-climate-change/ "Global Health: Can Condoms Combat Climate Change?")

