_This article was originally published on the blog of[Committee to Protect
Journalists](http://cpj.org/blog/2009/10/gabons-bloggers-struggle-to-take-
hold.php) on Oct 2, 2009. Republished with permission._

It’s been a couple of weeks since I left Gabon, and a month since elections to
pick a successor to Omar Bongo, who ruled Africa’s fourth-largest oil producer
for 41 years. There are unresolved questions about the ballot count and the
number of people killed in post-election violence.

![Riot Police confronts Journalists on august 7 in Rio during an opposition
protest \(Andriankoto Ratozamanana\)](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2009/10/Riot-Police-confronts-Journalists-on-august-7-in-Rio-
during-an-opposition-protest-Andriankoto-Ratozamanana.JPG)

Riot Police confronts Journalists on august 7 in Rio during an opposition
protest (Andriankoto Ratozamanana)

Until this summer, I did not know much about Gabon, except for a random
tidbit—that the nation of 1.4 million had a GDP matching Portugal. Things
changed after July 3 when Lova Rakotomalala and I, both bloggers from
Madagascar, received an e-mail from [Alice
Backer](https://globalvoicesonline.org/author/alice-backer/), a former French
editor of _[Global Voices Lingua](https://globalvoicesonline.org/lingua/)_ ,
about covering Gabon’s presidential elections scheduled for August 30.

I accepted because I need fresh air. After all, as a citizen blogger of
_[Global Voices teny Malagasy](https://mg.globalvoicesonline.org/)_ , I had
already experienced covering the bitter political crisis tearing apart my
Indian Ocean island of Madagascar. With crisis reporting platform _Foko-
ushahidi_ , which allowed ordinary citizens to send testimonies via SMS, real-
time reporting on [Twitter](http://twitter.com/search?q=%23Madagascar), and
local Web sites such as _[Topmada](http://www.topmada.com/)_ , Lova, myself
and other citizen journalists helped cover all sides of the unfolding crisis.
Citizen media reports were even
[quoted](http://observers.france24.com/en/content/20090127-looting-madagascar-
observer-tells-story-riots-antananarivo) by [international
media](http://rakotomalala.blogspot.com/2009/03/all-that-tweets.html) as the
Malagasy media was [divided into partisan](http://cpj.org/blog/2009/07/in-
madagascar-media-torn-along-partisan-lines.php) political positions.

Gabon, on the other hand, is not known as a “wired” country in tech speak.
Less than 6 percent of the population has access to the Internet, according to
_[InternetWorldStats](http://www.internetworldstats.com/africa.htm#ga). _While
__ intense public outcry opposed our former president’s closure of rival’s TV
station and eventually led to his toppling from power, government censorship
of media appeared to be the accepted norm in Gabon for many years, according
to press freedom organizations.

Nevertheless, as I left the winter-season cool temperatures of Madagascar for
the hot and humid air of Gabon’s seaside capital of Libreville, just above the
Equator, I knew the elections would be historic, if not for the unprecedented
role of new media technologies.

Twenty-three candidates were contesting the elections, many with appealing
campaign Web sites such as _[Ali9](http://www.ali9.org/)_ ,
_[Mamboundou](http://www.mamboundou.org/index.php?option=com_content&view=article&id=46&Itemid=27)_
, _[AndreMbaObame](http://www.andrembaobame.com/)_ or
_[Moubamba](http://moubamba.com/)._ Candidates were also aggressively
campaigning on [social networking
sites.](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2009/07/31/gabon-presidential-
candidate-uses-social-media-in-historic-election/) One of the candidates for
instance, Franco-Gabonese journalist Bruno Ben Moumbamba, was among the most
active on [Facebook](http://www.facebook.com/pages/Bruno-Ben-
Moubamba/98875962260#/pages/Bruno-Ben-
Moubamba/98875962260?v=info&viewas=505924258),
[Flickr](http://www.flickr.com/photos/brunobenmoubamba/sets/),
[YouTube](http://www.youtube.com/user/brunobenmoubamba) and
[Twitter](http://search.twitter.com/search?q=gabon). Ali Ben Bongo, the ruling
party candidate, even distinguished his campaign by sending on two separate
occasions a [personal SMS](http://www.upg-
gabon.org/index.php?option=com_content&view=article&id=1137:des-societes-
privees-de-telephonie-mobile-au-service-du-candidat-ali-ben-
bongo&catid=44:societe&Itemid=65) message to the customers of Gabon’s three
main mobile carriers, [Zain](http://www.ga.zain.com/), Libertis, and
[Moov](http://www.moov.ga/).

In the many bars (commonly called “makis”) of downtown Libreville’s Louis
district, people discussed everything around the local beer
“[Regab](http://www.dooyoo.co.uk/drinks/regab/1008615/)” and braised fish
dishes. With Bongo’s monopoly of state media, most local radio stations
oriented toward religious and entertainment programming, and a handful of
partisan TV stations controlled by the elite in politics, business, and the
clergy, most Gabonese turned to international media for objective news.
Unfortunately, the print and broadcast media’s coverage of the elections was
limited by [censorship](http://cpj.org/2009/09/gabon-election-marred-by-media-
censorship.php), intimidation, and [violence](http://cpj.org/2009/09/gabonese-
media-under-attack-since-election.php) against reporters.

When I arrived in Libreville, I quickly detected that people were reluctant to
freely express their views in public to someone they do not know. Even the
barber I went to for a haircut politely declined to share his views on the
elections, when I put the question to him as the TV in his salon was blaring
Africa 24’s coverage of the polls. Bizarre.

At first, many young people I met did not seem very interested in the
Internet. In fact, the most educated told me they used the Web exclusively to
check e-mail and visit chat or dating sites. Others appeared motivated by the
idea of blogging, but wanted to be paid to do it. Nevertheless, with help, a
few people took their first steps in using the Web as social media, and a
handful of new citizen voices slowly emerged. Journalist and activist [Gaston
Asséko](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Tea3tBx94-4) shared his
[experience](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Tea3tBx94-4) on voting day on
_YouTube_. Roger Edima Mavoungou Wilson, a communications professional,
started a [blog](http://wakawaka.posterous.com/) and is actively
[tweeting](http://twitter.com/rogermavtitipo). **** Régis Ngoma, a local
comedian, even started a _YouTube_ channel with
[videos](http://www.youtube.com/user/NewFFTV#play/all/uploads-all/0/EdR-
OxBFDio) satirizing the elections.

Regardless, there were many difficulties in my reporting. I remember being
unable to text after the mobile companies
[suspended](http://www.lemonde.fr/afrique/article/2009/09/03/gabon-ali-bongo-
elu_1235225_3212.html) SMS service during the elections. As a result, a crisis
reporting platform deployed by a Gabonese diaspora movement based in France
called _[The Guardian Angels of
Gabon](http://www.lesangesgardiensdugabon.com/) _on
_[Ushahidi](http://www.lesangesgardiensdugabon.com/ushahidi/main)_ never took
off. Nevertheless, social media facilitated the flow of information between
the Gabonese diaspora and those living home. “#Gabon” even jumped to the [top
tag ](http://farm3.static.flickr.com/2637/3892021091_4c3a7846f0_b.jpg)on
francophone _Twitter_ following the announcement of elections results,
according to _Twirus_.

Doubts persist over the results of the presidential elections and with a
[recount](http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/africa/8280079.stm) of the votes in
progress, journalists are still under pressure. Just last weekend, local
caricaturist and [blogger](http://dipoula.paquet.li/) Patrick Essono was
[detained](http://www.google.com/hostednews/afp/article/ALeqM5if8WhtfSYDBOes8KA80W8idmWuqg)
for drawing a cartoon of two policemen. A day before, the editor of state
daily _[L’Union](http://union.sonapresse.com/)_ , Albert Yangari, was
[detained](http://www.google.com/hostednews/afp/article/ALeqM5iaRp9RJBA0XYNMBGPgR0twJB6Wuw)
for questioning after publishing interviews with residents of Port-Gentil that
suggested more people had been killed in [post-election
violence](http://english.ntdtv.com/ntdtv_en/ns_me/2009-09-08/250441782933.html)
than
[reported](http://www.google.com/hostednews/afp/article/ALeqM5hH3HSWyLEQbppOB7dw00P9kOh38g)
by the government. This week, there were reports that the house of Jonas
Moulenda, the journalist who carried out the interviews, was
[searched](http://www.gaboneco.com/show_article.php?IDActu=15134) by security
agents, and that he has received [death
threats](http://www.channelafrica.org/portal/site/ChannelAfrica/menuitem.0440eb803775db47ee41ee41674daeb9/?vgnextoid=928960fb1eb04210VgnVCM10000077d4ea9bRCRD&vgnextfmt=default).

