What does the Japanese blogosphere and Twitterverse have to say about Tokyo's
bid to host the 2016 Olympics? Part Two introduces some reactions _after_ Rio
won the bid. (See [Part One](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2009/10/02/japan-
reactions-to-tokyos-olympic-bid-part-one/) for pre-announcement reactions.)

[![Tokyo tower olympic lighting by Flickr user
yoheiyamashita](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2009/10/tokyotwer.jpg)](http://www.flickr.com/photos/monana7/2616156564/)

Tokyo tower olympic lighting by Flickr user yoheiyamashita

[TomokoHosaka](http://twitter.com/TomokoHosaka/status/4557867562) went to see
the Tokyo Tower light up in Olympic colors:

> Just got back from Olympics party at Tokyo Tower. Nobody seemed too
> surprised or disappointed at loss.

[misty909](http://twitter.com/misty909/statuses/4555411378) tweeted:

> 東京オリンピック落選。まあ国内の盛りあがってなさを顧みれば当然だと思うんだけども。

Tokyo lost the bid. Well, it's only natural considering everyone's disinterest
in it.

[moblogjp](http://twitter.com/moblogjp/statuses/4555531099) refers to 2002
FIFA World Cup Korea/Japan:

> 東京落選かぁ。良い悪いは置いておいて、自分の街でオリンピックとか経験してみたかったな。まあ、ワールドカップがあったから良いか。

Hmmm, Tokyo lost the bid. Good or bad, I wanted to experience the Olympics in
my own town. Oh well, we had the World Cup so it's all right.

[CO__CO](http://twitter.com/CO__CO/statuses/4555595326) tweeted:

> 落選してTLが激しく流れるのを見ると、「なんだ。実は日本人オリンピック気になってたんじゃーん(´∀｀)」って思うよね。もちろんわたしもその1人。ふふ。

Watching my Twitter timeline go crazy with news about Tokyo losing the bid
makes me think “Ah, so the Japanese _do_ give a damn about the Olympics after
all!” Of course, I'm one of them. Hehe!

[unisindo](http://twitter.com/unisindo/statuses/4555689758) tweeted:

>
> オリンピックは使われる税金も半端ないと思うんだよなあ。交通・宿泊パニックとか治安の問題も対策しなくちゃだろうし…期間もあるし…世界の選手にとっては日本での開催が一番安心・安全・おいしいんだろうけれどもな？

The amount of tax money used for the Olympics is incredible. And think about
the panic over transportation and accommodation, having to secure safety for
everybody, and over a long period at that! From an athlete's point of view, I
think a Japanese Olympics is the safest, the least worrying and the most
delicious.

[taninon](http://twitter.com/taninon/statuses/4555408034) is thankful for the
opportunity to enjoy the [giant Gundam
statue](http://mdn.mainichi.jp/photospecials/graph/gundam1/) in Odaiba:

> あの東京オリンピック騒ぎのオカゲで実物大ガンダムがみれたんなら、実に有意義だったと言える気がする

We got to see that life-size Gundam because of the Olympic bid so I'd call it
a meaningful venture.

[tatsuta3](http://twitter.com/tatsuta3/statuses/4556376637) is practical:

> 不調だ。とっても体調が悪い。オリンピックは落選・・・・。リオデジャネイロになったらまたまた夜更かしの日々だよ。お肌に悪いよ。

I haven't been feeling well. And we didn't win the bid….. Rio de Janeiro means
sleepless nights, you know. It's bad for the skin!

[koichiro516](http://twitter.com/koichiro516/status/4557736518) comments on
the television coverage:

> 街頭で「残念オリンピック見たかった」とか言ってるやつはなぜ去年北京に行かなかったのか。新しく臨海副都心にスタジアム作るより絶対安いだろｗ

People on the streets are saying “It's too bad, I wanted to see the Olympics”.
Why didn't they go to Beijing last year? It's less costly than a brand new
stadium in the Tokyo waterfront subcenter!

[Kigyo Hiroshi](http://ameblo.jp/social-activity/entry-10356522837.html) is
wistful:

> 2016年に東京オリンピックをしたとして、それを観た子供たちは、すごく印象に残るんだろうなぁ、と思っていました。  
>
> 仮に、2016年時点で、8歳の子供が、東京オリンピックを観て、頑張っているスポーツ選手に憧れをもって・・・その子たちが大人になった時に・・・とてもいい影響を与えそうですよね。  
>  ブラウン管を通して、感じるオリンピックの雰囲気っていいですよね。あれを生で、日本で観ることが出来たら・・・いいなぁ、と思います。

If Tokyo hosted the Olympics in 2016, it would be extremely memorable for the
children who watched the games.

