[![banner_180x150](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2009/09/banner_180x1501.png)](http://climatechange.thinkaboutit.eu/)Last
week, Copenhagen hosted the launch event of the European Blogging Competition
TH!NK ABOUT IT – Round #2: Climate Change. The competition brought together 92
bloggers from all over Europe, and special guests from Brazil, China, India,
Mexico, South Africa and the USA.

The competition aims to raise awareness about climate change and discuss the
consequences of climate change in different countries, points of view all over
the world, and how local media and the public approach the subject. Organized
by the [EJC (European Journalism Centre](http://ejc.net/)), the launch event
was split over two days, the first featuring a series of lectures from experts
on climate change, and the second devoted to a visit to the Danish eco-village
of [Dyssekilde](http://dyssekilde.dk/ix.asp?m=97), in the north of the
country.

The launch event kicked off with a welcome lecture by _Wilfried Rütten_ ,
Director of the EJC, followed by a talk by _Svend Olling_ , Head of
Department, COP15 Logistics. Mr. Olling gave a presentation on the work that
the Danish government has done for the competition and the expectations
surrounding the [COP15 conference](http://en.cop15.dk/).

Journalists from many parts of the world joined a round-table discussion
moderated by Raymond Frenken from [EUX-TV](http://www.youtube.com/user/EUXTV).
Names such as _Tasha Eichenseher_ , a [National
Geographic](http://news.nationalgeographic.com/news/) science producer and
editor, _Gerald Traufetter_ , a science and technology correspondent for Der
Spiegel, _Asbjørn Jørgensen_ , from the [Århus School of Media and
Journalism](http://www.dmjx.dk/international/) in Denmark, and _Ramesh Jaura_
, [Regional Director of IPS Europe](http://www.ips.org/institutional/our-
global-structure/biographies/ramesh-jaura/), discussed how the media covers
issue relating to climate change and the environment.

_François Roudié_ , the European Commission Policy Coordinator, gave a rundown
on the EU's response to climate change. A counterpoint to this was provided by
_Andreas Barkman_ from the European Environmental Agency, and Head of the
Group for Climate Change Mitigation, who highlighted the problematic aspects
of the negotiations that are going to be held at COP15.

Greenpeace Nordic Executive Director _Mads Christensen_ also underlined what
bloggers can do to encourage climate change discussion and voiced Greenpeace's
expectations for a possible agreement resulting from COP15. In his talk, he
expressed the view that, taking into account current negotiations and the
speeches of national leaders all over the world, a huge cut in CO2 emissions
and an idealistic agreement are unlikely to take place.

Probably the most eagerly anticipated lecture of the day was given by _Søren
Hermansen_. Søren was one of the [Heroes of the
Environment](http://www.time.com/time/specials/packages/article/0,28804,1841778_1841782_1841789,00.html)
named by TIME magazine in 2008, and he gave a presentation on the [Samso
experiment](http://www.energiakademiet.dk/default_uk.asp) before the audience
of bloggers. This experiment aims to introduce alternative energy resources to
local environments. In this case, wind energy is responsible for meeting all
the villagers’ energy demands. Readers can check out some of the Samso
experiment photos [in this Flickr
pool](http://www.flickr.com/photos/phillacombe/sets/72157619735440222/) by
_Phil Lacombe_.

On the second day of the event, bloggers visited the eco-village of Dyssekilde
in the north of the country. The village has 70 households and a population of
130 adults and 50 children. It was created more than 20 years ago, and its
inhabitants share an environmental approach, feeling the urge to act as
pioneers of a lifestyle that allows a more ecologically friendly, sustainable
community. Like the Samso experiment, Dyssekilde also depends on wind energy
to meet the villagers’ energy demands, and since they don't use much of the
energy, what is left over is sold to a Danish energy company.

[![092220091052](http://farm4.static.flickr.com/3484/3945524047_3a79d1f1d6.jpg)](http://www.flickr.com/photos/diegocasaes/3945524047/
"092220091052 por Diego Casaes, no Flickr")

A Dyssekilde household.

Dyssekilde houses have a peculiar appearance. Villagers build their own homes,
and many of them have solar panels attached in order to encourage the use of
clean energy. Houses also have south-facing windows, so that they can make as
much use of the solar energy and natural light as possible, and reduce the use
of internal lights and heating units during the day.

Another great example of sustainable living in Dyssekilde is the non-chemical
waste water cleaning system. The villagers created the system based on natural
cleaning, which uses 30.000 willows to cleanse the water thoroughly, without
chemicals or other products. Even though their current system reached its
maximum capacity in 2006, they are now planning to build the biggest non-
chemical waste water cleaning system in the world.

**Who are these bloggers anyway?  
**

“Would you like to participate in an international blogging competition about
Climate Change in Copenhagen?” Some ninety people from all over the world said
YES to the above question and have just spent three days in Denmark, attending
the launch event of the TH!NK ABOUT IT blogging competition. But who are those
people? And why did they decide to engage in environmental cyberactivism?

Most participants came from Europe, but the novelty of this second edition of
TH!NK ABOUT IT was the participation of people from various developing
countries, such as Brazil, India, Mexico, China and South Africa. Many
participants came from Eastern Europe, but Western Europe was also well
represented, with many British and Italian bloggers. The nature of their blogs
and their motives for participating in the event were as diverse as their
countries of origin.

[![Journalist Charles Nisz Lourenço from
Brazil](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2009/09/IMG_4503-225x300.jpg)](http://www.flickr.com/photos/diegocasaes/3962101863/)

Journalist Charles Nisz Lourenço from Brazil

Many professional journalists also took part in the competition, showing that
blogging can add to a profession that already deals with reporting and
expressing one's views of the world. Charles Nisz Lourenço, from Brazil, works
as a journalist and is about to start a PhD in Economics, and is quite new to
blogging. He only started his personal blog, [_Fragmentos da Realidade
Cotidiana_](http://charlesnisz.wordpress.com/) [Fragments of Daily Reality,
pt] in February this year, and has covered political, financial and
environmental issues; he also blogs for the [Lixo
Eletrônico](http://lixoeletronico.org/) blog, which was behind the [Electronic
Waste Manifesto](../2009/07/30/brazil-fighting-for-more-recycling-with-the-
electronic-waste-manifesto/).

Maltese journalist [_Keith
Demicoli_](http://climatechange.thinkaboutit.eu/think2/blogger/demicoli) has
his own TV program about politics in “the happiest place on Earth”, as he
described his country of origin, and is participating in the TH!NK ABOUT IT
competition for the second time.

[![keithdemicoli](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2009/09/092220091062-768x1024.jpg)](http://www.flickr.com/photos/diegocasaes/3946311420/)

Maltese Journalist Keith Demicoli

Chinese-Spanish language translator _Ding Dawei_ , also known by his Spanish
name, “Diego”, works as a professional journalist for the Chinese _[People's
Daily](http://english.people.com.cn/)_ [en], but is a newcomer to blogging,
through which he wishes to look more closely at Climate Change issues and
expand his horizons.

[![Ding Dawei or just "Diego". Chinese Journalist and newcomer
blogger.](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2009/09/092120091000-768x1024.jpg)](http://www.flickr.com/photos/diegocasaes/3941848657/in/set-72157622419293730/)

Ding Dawei. Chinese Journalist and newcomer blogger.

Non-journalists were, however, in the majority. A friendly pair of bloggers
from Pilani in India, brother _Abhishek_ _Nayak_ and his sister _Anindita
Nayak_ , enjoyed the launch event for the competition. She is only 18 years
old, but already blogs for the _[AoC
Initiative](http://iycnagents.blogspot.com/)_ , a youth delegation to the UN
Negotiations on Climate Change. He was coy about his blog, which he says is
“full of very ironic comments”, but with a little pushing we got [the
URL](http://abhishake.wordpress.com/). He has been blogging since 2006 about
politics and Indian issues, as well as sharing his photos and news about
events he attends.

[![Anindita Nayak and Abishek Nayak](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2009/09/IMG_4511-300x225.jpg)](http://www.flickr.com/photos/diegocasaes/3962100335/)

Anindita Nayak and Abhishek Nayak, participants from India

_[Lucy Setian](http://www.lucyset.blogspot.com/)_ [bg], from Bulgaria, works
as a journalist, but has an online dream-come-true literary project with her
boyfriend called [Azcheta.com](http://www.azcheta.com/) [bg], where they write
book reviews and organize literary events in Sofia, and have gained fame with
events such as “Coffee goes with books, not cigarettes”. Blogging about the
environment allows her to address her political aspirations, too.

[![Lucy Setian](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2009/09/IMG_4504.JPG)](http://www.flickr.com/photos/diegocasaes/3962876200/)

Lucy Setian

American _Devin McIntire_ , from California, USA, has just set up the blog
[The Green Cadet](http://www.thegreencadet.com/), hoping to disseminate green
business opportunities online and, who knows, maybe one day make them happen
in reality. He believes that the solutions for environmental problems will
come not from politicians, but rather from local eco-entrepreneurial
initiatives.

[![IMG_4518](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2009/09/IMG_4518-225x300.jpg)](http://www.flickr.com/photos/diegocasaes/3962170835/)

Devin McIntire from the USA

Some bloggers were notably more high-tech than the others, like the Italian
[_Frederico Pistono_](http://www.federicopistono.org/), who participates in no
fewer than 12 blogs! A movie maker, from the beginning of the launch event he
was filming the bloggers (at lectures, on the metro, etc), and is bound to
have some interesting video clips of the competition. Here are some other
blogs where you can check out his work:
_[AsianCineBlog](http://eigakyou.blogspot.com/)_ [it] and
_[Activism](http://www.zeitgeistitalia.org/) _[it] _._

[![092220091065](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2009/09/092220091065-768x1024.jpg)](http://www.flickr.com/photos/diegocasaes/3946312566/in/set-72157622419293730/)

Frederico Pistono from Italy

Other video bloggers were present at the competition. The British drama
student _Matthew Turner_ maintains a [YouTube
account](http://www.youtube.com/TheMattieBoosh) where he “takes the piss out
of himself” online – in typical British style, he aims to treat serious issues
with humor.

[![IMG_4472](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2009/09/IMG_4472-225x300.jpg)](http://www.flickr.com/photos/diegocasaes/3962878570/)

Matthew Turner from the UK

_[Radka Lankasova](http://lankasova.blog.idnes.cz/)_ has a personal blog and
is also a contributor to the number one blog in the Czech Republic, but her
main motivation is to make friends and travel through blogging opportunities
like TH!NK ABOUT IT.

[![Radka Lankasova](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2009/09/IMG_4464-225x300.jpg)](http://www.flickr.com/photos/diegocasaes/3962877082/)

Radka Lankasova from Czech Republic

Some bloggers taking part in the competition were still crawling in the
blogosphere or experimenting with it for various reasons, but the EJC
(European Journalism Commission) hopes to encourage them to start blogging
about the environment, too. From 23rd September to 16th December 2009 bloggers
will discuss climate change on the [official competition
platform](http://climatechange.thinkaboutit.eu/). Although there are prizes,
one of them being an environmentalist's dream – to attend the COP15 conference
for two weeks in Copenhagen with all expenses paid by the EJC – there is a
sense of community rather than rivalry amongst the bloggers. As you can see,
there are plenty of reasons to blog about the environment!

Written in collaboration with [Diego
Casaes](https://globalvoicesonline.org/author/diego-casaes/).

This article was proofread by [Maisie
Fitzpatrick](https://globalvoicesonline.org/author/maisie-fitzpatrick/).

