In anticipation of flu season, which officially kicks off [October 4](
http://www.cdc.gov/flu/weekly/), the U.S. government announced the winner of a
video contest today to encourage flu prevention, including stopping H1N1 or
swine flu.

H1N1 was first detected in mid-April and has since made its way [around the
world](http://flutracker.rhizalabs.com/). In the U.S., laboratory-confirmed
cases of the virus have led to 9,079 hospitalizations and 593 deaths,
[reports](http://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/preview/mmwrhtml/mm58e0910a1.htm) the
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. It was anticipated that cases
would increase as students returned to school this month. So far [21 U.S.
states](http://www.cdc.gov/flu/weekly/ ) are reporting widespread influenza
activity, mostly related to swine flu, which is unusually high for September.

To help combat a rise in all types of flu, including H1N1 cases, the U.S.
Department of Health and Human Services
[announced](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=gteC4AALn08) a video contest on
July 9 asking people to create a PSA (public service announcement) on flu
prevention. The videos could be 15, 30 or 60 seconds and had to be submitted
on the department's [YouTube channel](http://www.youtube.com/usgovhhs). Over
200 videos were entered from across the country and the top 10 entries were
chosen and put to a public vote. The winner, who received $2,500 in cash and
is featured on national television, was announced, on September 22.

Dr. John Clarke of New York came out [on
top](http://www.flu.gov/psa/contest/2009/index.html) with his video entitled
“H1N1 Rap by Dr. Clarke.” In it, he creates a rap song clearly laying out
steps to stop the virus:

Besides the winning rap video, there were also [nine runners up](
http://www.flu.gov/psa/contest/2009/index.html) in the contest, with videos
featuring everything from wit to animation to straight up seriousness to get
the message of stopping swine flu across. This runner up, entitled “Chainsaw,”
uses humor to encourage people to stay safe. In it, a man uses a chainsaw as a
form of prevention against the virus:

In the video “Toothbrush” you see a toothbrush being used to clean the surface
of objects, ranging from an ATM machine and a computer mouse to a public pay
phone. The analogy is gross, but effective:

The video “Simply Fighting” is one of two runners up to use animation.
Throughout it a white line morphs into four simple steps for H1N1 prevention:
get vaccinated yearly, stay home if you're sick, cover sneezes and coughs, and
wash your hands frequently:

Other runner up videos also focus on vaccination as a tool for prevention. The
H1N1 flu vaccine is expected to be
[available](http://www.cnn.com/2009/HEALTH/09/14/h1n1.flu.vaccine/index.html)
in the U.S. in early October, though you can already get the seasonal flu
vaccine, which protects against the flu that arises in the fall. Researchers
recently determined that a single injection of the swine flu vaccine is enough
to protect against the virus.

Health officials are [urging](
http://www.cdc.gov/h1n1flu/vaccination/public/vaccination_qa_pub.htm) certain
groups of people to be among the first in line for the H1N1 vaccine when it
becomes available, including pregnant women, school-age children and anyone
with underlying health conditions, like diabetes and heart disease, or
compromised immune systems.  
_  
Thumbnail photo of[Swine Flu Panic](
http://www.flickr.com/photos/4yas/3492450507/) by [Y](
http://www.flickr.com/photos/4yas/) on Flickr._

