The political impasse in Madagascar has taken on new dimensions. In an
[attempt to legitimize the military-backed
government](http://www.ethanzuckerman.com/blog/2009/09/24/wanted-
legitimation/) on the international scene, Madagascar's current leader, Andry
Rajoelina, was scheduled to take the floor at the UN General Assembly in New
York on Thursday, only to be [barred from
speaking](http://www.reuters.com/article/newsOne/idUSLQ700471?virtualBrandChannel=11604).
He was later rescheduled to address the Assembly at the following Friday
session when the representative of the Democratic Republic of Congo, on behalf
of the [Southern African Development Community
(SADC)](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Southern_African_Development_Community),
formally protested his speech as he was about to take the floor. The motion
[was put to a vote
](http://www.un.org/apps/newsFr/storyF.asp?NewsID=20171&Cr=Madagascar&Cr1=)
(fr) and resulted in 23 against Rajoelina's presence at the stage, 4 in favor
and 6 abstentions. The procedure was marred with legal argumentation and a bit
of confusion as one can observe on the [following video by Malagasy blogger
vatofototra](http://www.dailymotion.com/related/xam1cl/video/xam1ae_partie-1exclusion-
de-andry-rajoelin_news):

**[PARTIE 2-Exclusion de Andry RAJOELINA à l'ONU 25 sept
2009](http://www.dailymotion.com/video/xam1cl_partie-2exclusion-de-andry-
rajoelin_news)**  
_Uploaded by[vatofototra](http://www.dailymotion.com/vatofototra). – [Watch
the latest news videos.](http://www.dailymotion.com/us/channel/news)_

Many Malagasy bloggers/twitterers followed the exchange on the UN webcast and
reacted instantly via twitter as the crisis in Madagascar took another
improbable turn.  
As Rajoelina was about to take the stage, Malagasy blogger [_Aliotsy_
noted](http://twitter.com/aliotsy/statuses/4378740431):

> Congo's rep just called on member states (SADC or UN?) to walk out on
> Rajoelina if he speaks. http://www.un.org/webcast/ #Madagascar #fb

_Rashaja_ is a [bit
perplexed](http://twitter.com/rashaja/statuses/4379148533):

> situation is quite funny actually…total mess, total confusion. President of
> Session and advisor not experienced enough? #UN #Madagascar

_Samganegie_ [adds](http://twitter.com/sameganegie/status/4379281628) (fr):

> président de l'assemblé est même sorti de sa tribune, et ses assistant sont
> completement paumés !!#madagascar

President of the assembly even left the stage. His assistants seem completely
lost !

_Streetrover_ [bemoans the state of politics in
Madagascar](http://twitter.com/streetrover/statuses/4380459367):

> Rajoelina shunned at the UN, its ambassador @ UN publicly named in an
> internatnl bribery scheme on the same day! #madagascar needs a break!

_HairyT_ and _Solofo_ agree that [it was a low
point](http://twitter.com/hairyt/statuses/4383200778) in Madagascar's history:

> RT @solofo: What a shame for #Madagascar . I don't care about #Rajoelina/ RT
> Pdt Prevented from Taking Floor at #UN

The pro-government blog Madagate [weighs in on the incident
](http://madagate.com/politique/1128-onu-la-video-dont-lhistoire-prendra-acte-
du-fort-lobbying-de-la-rd-congo-sur-andry-rajoelina.html)(fr):

> Ce moment irritant dans l’histoire de Madagascar fait déjà partie du passé.
> Car cette crise aura une fin, quoi qu’il puisse arriver. Pour le moment, la
> majorité des Malgaches de Madagascar commence à la vivre très mal car ils se
> perdent en conjectures.

This irritating moment in the history of Madagascar is already in the past.
For this crisis will end, one way or the other. For now, the majority of
Malagasy in Madagascar starts to suffer greatly from all this and all the
speculations.

In the meantime, Unrest has once again broken in the aftermath of the UN
fiasco. [Investgasy](http://twitter.com/tomavana/statuses/4392240041) posted
on twitter today:

> #Madagascar: shootings in Anosy (Tana) right now, armed 4×4 are everywhere

. The report was later confirmed by Reuters, [reporting tear gas launching and
wanring shots fired at
demonstrators](http://www.reuters.com/article/newsOne/idUSLQ700471?virtualBrandChannel=11604).

Finally _Jentilisa_ reports that young reservists of the army who fought by
Rajoelina's side early in the crisis are now [demanding that Rajoelina keep
his promises ](http://jentilisa.blaogy.com/post/122/6739)(mg):

> ..ny rezervista tanora, nitolona tamin'ny andron'ny TGV, hidina an-dalambe
> izy ireo hitondra sora-baventy satria tsy tanteraka ny fampanantenana natao
> tamin'izy ireo, toy ny hanomezana asa ho azy ireo tahaka ny hoe fampidirana
> azy ho miaramila ary hotsinjovina manokana ny rezervista nanohana ny tolona.

Young reservists who fought by TGV's side, will demonstrate to demand that the
promises made to them be kept: such as, the guarantee of employment in the
army and that special attention will be given to those who contributed to the
struggle

