[![badge-180-150](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2009/09/bad-180-150.jpg)](http://www.blogactionday.org/)On
October 15, bloggers from all over the world will get together to blog about
climate change in one of the largest social change events on the web: the
[Blog Action Day](http://www.blogactionday.org/).

This is an annual event that unites the world's bloggers in posting about the
same issue on the same day. The aim of this global demonstration is to raise
awareness and encourage a global conversation on important subjects that face
the world.

In their [official blog](http://site.blogactionday.org/), _Robin Beck_
[announced](http://site.blogactionday.org/general/blog-action-
day-2009-climate-change/) the topic of the Blog Action Day 2009:

> I am so happy to announce the topic for Blog Action Day 2009: climate
> change.
>
> Thousands of people voted and together weâ€™re going to bring new breadth to
> the global climate change conversation just as our leaders prepare to meet
> in Copenhagen this December in an effort to agree on lasting solutions to
> this crisis.

Blog Action Day was founded by Collis & Cyan Ta'eed in 2007 with the support
of their team at [Envato](http://envato.com/). On that first occasion,
founders encouraged more than 20.000 bloggers to devote a day to blogging
about environmental issues. The next year, in 2008, they highlighted poverty
issues with bloggers sharing their personal perspectives and ideas for
solutions.

This year, climate change is the subject, which is a great opportunity to
build on all the discussions and online campaigns that are being organized in
advance of the [COP15 United Nations meeting](http://en.cop15.dk/) in Denmark
in December 2009.

Anyone can participate in Blog Action Day on October 15, be it on blogs,
online journals or online magazines. There are no limits to how many posts one
can write nor to the content of it, as long as climate change is the subject.
Among the supporters of Blog Action Day are organizations such as
[Oxfam](http://oxfam.org), [Avaaz](http://avaaz.org),
[TckTckTck](http://tcktcktck.org), [Greenpeace](http://greenpeace.org) and
[Amnesty International](http://amnesty.org).

As an official blog partner, Global Voices will support Blog Action Day by
encouraging bloggers around the world to [register their support
online](http://www.blogactionday.org/en/blogs/new) and join in. On October 15
and beyond, Global Voices bloggers look forward to linking to and translating
what bloggers around the world are saying [about climate change and the
environment](https://globalvoicesonline.org/-/topics/environment/) where they
live.

