Human rights activists in [Ciudad
Juárez](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ciudad_Ju%C3%A1rez) are opposing the
recent nomination of Arturo Chávez Chávez as the Attorney General of Mexico.
He was nominated by the [Mexican President Felipe
Calderón](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Felipe_calderon). Protesters claim that
Chávez’s track record regarding human rights work leaves much to be desired
and point to the time when he was the Attorney General of the State of
Chihuahua in the early 1990s. This was a time when Ciudad Juárez erupted in a
violent wave of
[femicides](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Female_homicides_in_Ciudad_Ju%C3%A1rez)—mass
murder of women. Most of the protesters and activists are the mothers, family
members, and friends of the deceased or missing women. They claim that public
officials from Chihuahua have been involved in covering up the crimes and have
not done much to solve them.

As chief prosecutor for the state of Chihuahua, Chávez has been denounced by
Mexican and international human rights organizations, as described by _The Rag
Blog_ , which writes about [Fear and Loathing in Mexico: A Pandemic of
Paranoia.](http://theragblog.blogspot.com/2009/09/fear-and-loating-in-mexico-
pandemic-of.html) These organizations include the National Human Rights
Commission (CNDH), the Inter-American Human Rights Commission (CIDH), members
of the European Parliament, and others from the international human rights
community.

Concern about the deaths of the women from Juárez has attracted international
attention, and feminist activists like Eve Ensler, creator of the Vagina
Monologues and actress Sally Field have led marches through the industrial
city.

The blog _Resistencia Hasta el Fin [es]_ [makes
reference](http://resistenciahastaelfin.blogspot.com/2009/09/arturo-chavez-
chavez-y-calderon.html) to [sexist and misogynist comments made by Chávez
[es]](http://cronica.com.mx/nota.php?id_nota=457519) about the murdered women,
such as “If they raped and killed them (the women) it wasn't because they were
going to Mass” and “They are at fault for being attacked, for the provocative
way that they dress.” It is comments like these that make activists say that
Chávez is unqualified for the job for which he is nominated.

The death toll continues to climb and [many crimes remain
unsolved](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2009/03/26/mexico-unsolved-
feminicide-along-the-border/), leaving the community with little recourse but
to take matters into their own hands by forming grassroots non-profit groups
to shed light on the issue of the border city femicides. [Nuestras Hijas de
Regreso a Casa A.C. [es]](http://www.mujeresdejuarez.org/) (May Our Daughters
Return Home, Civil Association) is at the forefront of the current protests
which have taken the streets in Ciudad Juarez, Chihuahua, bordering the city
of El Paso in Texas. They also held protests in Chihuahua's state capital and
nation’s capital, Mexico City. Protesters who traveled to Mexico City on
September 14, 2009 were unsuccessful in their attempts to speak directly with
members of the Senate regarding Chavez’s negligent human rights track record.

Carolina of the blog _Zapateando [es]_ writes about the Mexico City protest
and [how family members of the murdered women have mobilized against
Chávez](http://zapateando.wordpress.com/2009/09/16/familiares-de-mujeres-
asesinadas-en-juarez-movilizan-contra-ratificacion-de-un-complice-en-los-
crimenes/).

> “¡No pasará!” gritaron alrededor de 50 manifestantes frente a la sede del
> Senado de la República, para exigir que los legisladores voten en contra del
> nombramiento de Arturo Chávez Chávez como procurador general del país.

“He won’t pass!” shouted about 50 protesters in front of the Senate building
to demand the legislators vote against the nomination of Arturo Chávez Chávez
as Mexico’s Attorney General.

Chávez met with the Senate on September 21, 2009.
[Blogger](http://roblesmaloof.spaces.live.com/default.aspx) and twitterer
Jesús Robles ([@roblesmaloof](http://twitter.com/roblesmaloof)) is a self-
described human rights activist and witnessed the Senate hearings. He took
pictures and videos of some of the testimony against Chávez from some of the
witnesses who were present.

[![Mothers of some of the murdered women from Ciudad Juárez testifying in the
Senate. Photo by Jesús Robles and used with
permission.](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2009/09/juarez.jpg)](http://tweetphoto.com/pcjaaxin)

Mothers of some of the murdered women from Ciudad Juárez testifying in the
Senate. Photo by Jesús Robles and used with permission.

He also took this video of protests outside the Senate:

However, the PAN political party has already nodded in his favor regarding the
nomination. _Ganchoblog_ writes that [Chávez is likely to
pass](http://ganchoblog.blogspot.com/2009/09/likely-to-pass.html) since three
Senators who would be vital to derailing his nomination as Attorney General
will not stand in his way.

