Anti-capitalists, anti-war groups, anarchists, environmental rights groups,
and concerned citizens congregated in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania on Thursday,
September 24, to protest the negative effects of global corporate capitalism
during the [G-20 Summit](http://www.pittsburghsummit.gov/) of world leaders.

[![Arrested in Pittsburgh. Creative Commons photo by Flickr user
<em>america.gov</em>](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2009/09/arrested-
protester-299x300.png)](http://www.flickr.com/photos/americagov/3951787438/)

Arrested in Pittsburgh. Creative Commons photo by Flickr user america.gov

The G-20 is comprised of 19 leaders of the world's wealthiest countries and
representatives the European Union. President Obama is hosting the meeting
this year, and the topic of discussion is the global economic crisis. Critics
say the meeting is undemocratic and secretive. A common refrain is a demand to
put “people before profits”.

One group that calls itself the [_The Peoples Caravan Across
Pennsylvania_](http://www.g20caravan.info/) traveled and blogged their way
across the state of Pennsylvania before the Summit inviting supporters to join
them for the marches in Pittsburgh. They prepared [this audio
report](http://www.g20caravan.info/sites/default/files/peoples%20crarvan.mp3)
of the people they met along the way, describing their own economic hardships.

**Police crackdown**

Protesters were met by tough riot police who utilized tear gas, pepper spray,
rubber bullets and sound deterrents. Around [19 protesters were arrested
](http://www.philly.com/philly/wires/ap/news/nation/20090924_ap_pittsburghpolice19arresteding20protests.html)on
Thursday. Additional demonstrations are planned for Friday September 25,
according to information posted on the Pittsburgh [_G-20 Resistance Project_
’s website](http://resistg20.org/).

The Pittsburgh Indymedia [_G-Infinity_ ](http://indypgh.org/g20/)project is
chronicling the events through ongoing citizen media input, including a radio
stream, twitter feeds, mobile phone and video reports. They are also tracking
clashes with police on a Google map that shows activity all over the city.

The following YouTube video [by _Soul Pitt
TV_](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=rLtgUl31dSo), a channel run by an African-
American community [website](http://thesoulpitt.com/) in Pittsburgh, shows a
celebratory spirit among the different people who showed up to the protest on
the 24th which was dubbed _The People's Uprising_ :

_Soul Pitt TV_ describes the video:

> Raw video of G20 protesters as they leave Arsenal Park in Lawrenceville at
> 40th and Penn and make their way down to downtown Pittsburgh to protest the
> G20 summit. Unfortunately these protesters didn't make it past 34th street
> as tear gas was thrown and the crowd forced back to the park

YouTube user
[_thetwos_](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=0SwBU1DOO_Q&feature=player_embedded)
has posted a number of videos, including the one below, which _Marc Parent_
([@mparent77772](http://twitter.com/mparent77772)) and many others on Twitter
described as a “military sound weapon”. A [_NYTimes_
article](http://www.nytimes.com/2009/09/25/us/25pittsburgh.html?hp) said this
is the first time a sound cannon has been used for crowd control in the USA.

**In defense of civil rights**

The [American Civil Rights Union ](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/ACLU)is
collecting [complaints about law enforcement surrounding the
G-20](http://www.aclupa.org/issues/freespeech/g20/g20relatedcomplaints.htm) on
their website.

They ACLU also have a telephone hotline offering legal support to protesters
on the grounds that their [civil rights to peaceful
assembly](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Freedom_of_assembly) may have been
violated. Police are claiming that many of the protests are “unlawful
assemblies” while organizers of the main demonstrations say they have followed
the official protocol for obtaining permits. The ACLU of Pennsylvania even
[sued the city government](http://blog.aclu.org/2009/09/24/fighting-for-free-
speech-at-the-g20-in-pittsburgh/) to force them to issue permits for several
groups.

