![Global Change MS ActionAid and Global
Voices](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2009/09/gc-300x85.PNG)

[Global Change](http://www.ms.dk/sw123254.asp "Global Change"), the education
program of [MS ActionAid Denmak](http://www.ms.dk/sw13950.asp) has an
ambitious goal teaching social and political change on a global level through
education of young people in communication, new media and innovative
organising. They are being helped by a team of 31 Global Voices Blogger
Mentors that have each been paired with one Danish or African student in order
to help them become more familiar with both the technical and human aspects of
blogging.

**Challenges of mentoring virtually**

Since the [initial chain of introductory emails between Mentor and
Mentees](../2009/09/08/global-voices-bloggers-mentor-new-danish-and-african-
bloggers/ "initial chain of introduction via email between Mentor and
Mentees") around two weeks ago, numerous positive interactions have taken
place and new friendships are forming. Some Mentors have been giving technical
advice on Gmail, Twitter, RSS feed, Skype, Facebook, instant messaging,
embedding videos, sharing links, Flickr and creative commons, and Mentors have
also been commenting on [the Mentees’ new blogs](http://globalchangenow.net/).

However, in a recent online IRC chat meeting between Mentors to review
progress, some were concerned that many Mentees are still only treading
carefully into the online world, and have such a tight program, learning new
technology, while at the same time learning and planning a campaign for the
[Copenhagen climate change summit](http://en.cop15.dk/) that they have not all
been as excited about daily online communication via email and chat as the
Mentors.

**Resources for new bloggers**

Mentors have decided to approach this positively by looking for more ways to
inspire Mentees to find meaning in blogging and appreciate how sharing
information and building online communities can contribute to transformation,
epecially for a burning issue like Climate Change. With only 3-4 weeks left of
the mentorship, Mentors have discussed starting blog memes, and providing
topic suggestions for those new bloggers who are still unsure what to write
about.

Mentors have been on the go, gathering resources for better mentoring for
their Mentees on [a wiki
page](https://wiki.globalvoicesonline.org/article/Mentor_Planning). and in an
email group mailing list. Noteworthy resources include: The Common Craft “in
plain English” [video series](http://www.commoncraft.com/videos), including
“[Blogs in Plain English](http://www.commoncraft.com/blogs)” and “[Twitter in
Plain English](http://www.commoncraft.com/twitter)“; various articles on
[climate justice](http://www.globalissues.org/article/231/climate-justice-and-
equity "Climate Justice"); a list of[ environmental
journalists](http://tweepml.org/Society-of-Environmental-Journalists/
"Environmental Journalist") on Twitter; [Sylwia
Presley's](https://globalvoicesonline.org/author/sylwia-presley/) newly
started [blog about how to blog](http://bloggingalife.wordpress.com/ "blog
about how to blog"); and Diego's suggestion of this [inspiring
guide](http://chrisguillebeau.com/3x5/a-brief-guide-to-world-domination/
"inspiring guide").

**Catching up with Mentee Blogs**

Mentees have written many interesting and resourceful posts with their take on
climate change and its challenges. Following are some of the highlights from
the [31 mentees](http://globalchangenow.net/blogs "31 mentees").

_Annlou_ has questioned about [superficial green
revolution](http://globalchangenow.net/annlou/ "superficial green
revolution"). _Casper_ wrote about [the obvious limitations of the individual
approach – and the problems of the communal
alternative](http://globalchangenow.net/casper/2009/09/22/the-obvious-
limitations-of-the-individual-approach-and-the-prohttpglobalchangenow-
netcasperwp-adminpost-new-phpblems-of-the-communal-alternative/ "the obvious
limitations of the individual approach – and the problems of the communal
alternative"). _Josephine_ [wrote a thought
piece](http://globalchangenow.net/josephine/2009/09/17/food-and-thoughts/
"wrote a thought piece") which was triggered by the idea of climate friendly
food.

Mentee _Arvid_ and Mentor Renata Avila jointly posted their experience and
shared insights gathered while [Renata visited Dominican
Republic](http://globalchangenow.net/arvid/2009/09/25/thee-need-for-climate-
justice-the-dominican-republic/ "the Mentor visited Dominican Republic").
_Rie_ has blogged on [what is happening with the climate issue on the NGO and
grassroots level](http://globalchangenow.net/riegn84/2009/09/23/what-is-
happening-with-the-cl%20imate-issue-on-ngo-and-grassroot-level/ "what is
happening with the climate issue on NGO and grassroot level") where she
featured a number of non-governmental organizations such as Greenpeace and
Peoples Climate Action.

_Signe_ reflected on [the buzz about climate change and personal
responsibility.](http://globalchangenow.net/signe/2009/09/16/personal-
responsibility-we-need-more-transparency/ "the buzz about climate change and
personal responsibility.") _Simonwr_ wrote about [why changes must come from
ordinary people](http://globalchangenow.net/simonwr/2009/09/18/change-without-
leaders/ "how changes must come from people") rather than from government
leaders.

Mentees also organized this happening in central Copenhagen as part of the
Avaaz [Global Wake-Up Call on Climate
Change](http://www.avaaz.org/en/sept21_hub/).

