Three months after Honduran President Mel Zelaya [was ousted in a
coup](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2009/06/29/honduras-zelaya-arrested-and-
removed-as-president) that some Hondurans [claim was justified and others
insist was illegal](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2009/07/04/honduras-was-it-
a-coup), he returned to Honduras on September 21 seeking refuge in the
Brazilian Embassy in the capital city, Tegucigalpa. Zelaya's return has led to
an escalation of the political tension and division in the streets of
Honduras, leaving citizens frightened, and lacking food as a compulsory
nationwide curfew was imposed by Roberto Micheletti's interim government

In cities across the country, Zelaya supporters ignored the curfews and staged
protests, in spite of the warnings of the interim government and police. As a
result, police and Zelaya supporters clashed and [there have been reports of
casualties, as well as approximately 100 arrests
[es]](http://www.eluniversal.com.mx/notas/628486.html). The curfew was
temporarily halted between the hours of 10 am and 4 pm on September 23 and
allowed Hondurans to replenish supplies. Aaron Ortiz of
_Pensieve_[writes](http://pensieve.aeortiz.com/2009/09/23/curfew-lifted-for-a-
few-hours/):

> Most people were at work when Zelaya announced his return and were unable to
> prepare for a days-long curfew.
>
> Expect incredibly long lines, “venta loca” (mad sales) at the markets and
> bare counters at supermarkets everywhere, as millions of Hondurans rush to
> stockpile on food, candles, diesel, and other goods

Since the time Zelaya returned to the country, Hondurans have been using
citizen media to show some of the scenes from around the country. Many are
taking videos and uploading them to YouTube. One user,
[Daniel](http://www.youtube.com/user/drvmailbox) recorded a video in the area
near the Brazilian Embassy showing crowds of police assembled around the
building. This was taken on September 23, and he says “yesterday, it was chaos
here.”

YouTube user [Mirtria1](http://www.youtube.com/user/Mirtria1) uploaded videos
taken on his mobile phone from his vantage point in San Pedro Sula, near the
city's Cathedral.

_[Habla Honduras [es]](http://hablahonduras.com)_ is a collaborative citizen
journalism site that accepts contributions via the web, email and mobile
phones. Its [YouTube channel](http://www.youtube.com/user/hablahonduras) posts
a video of a man being taken away in the Morazan neighborhood of Tegucigalpa
on September 22.

