![quds0](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2009/09/quds0.jpg)On September 18, Iranian protesters wearing
green in support of the opposition, once more[
defied](http://edition.cnn.com/2009/WORLD/meast/09/18/iran.moussavi.quds/index.html)
the Iranian government in the streets of Tehran, Shiraz, Isfahan, and several
other cities as they protested against dictatorship.

The official Islamic Republic was observing [Quds Day
](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2009/09/16/iran-more-protests-planned-for-
sept-18-quds-day/)(a day of support for Palestinians against Israel) but the
opposition prefered to ask for freedom in Iran rather than for liberation of
foreign lands.

Iranian protesters chanted slogans such as ‘Neither Gaza nor Lebanon!’ ‘My
life is ready to be sacrified for Iran!’ ‘Down with the dictator!’ and [‘Down
with Russia’](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2009/07/17/iran-death-to-russia-
at-friday-prayer/).

People attending the rallies documented the events by with
[photos](http://www.flickr.com/photos/forever696/3930709893/in/set-72157622278491833/)
(above) and videos.

**Supporting opposition leaders**

Protesters in Karimkhan in the central part of Tehran, chanted slogans in
support of opposition leaders, [Mir Hussein Mousavi
](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mir-Hossein_Mousavi)and [Mehid
Karoubi](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mehdi_Karroubi).

**Martyr's mother**

The mother of [Sohrab Arabi](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sohrab_Aarabi), a
young man who was killed in a demonstration only days after the disputed
election in June, took part in the Qud's Day protests (as seen on
[iReport](http://www.ireport.com/docs/DOC-330345) video below). People chanted
slogans that ‘Sohrab is Alive!’ and ‘The government is dead!’.

There are more videos from the protests [on
iReport](http://www.ireport.com/tags/iran).

**Warning the government**

Protesters chanted in Vesal Street in Tehran, “This is the last warning – the
‘green movement’ is ready for uprising!”:

**Down with Russia in Shiraz**

Protesters in Shiraz rallied on Quds Day but preferred to chant against
Russia, rather than Israel. This is in reference to[ opposition
accusations](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2009/07/16/iran-protests-prompt-
emergence-of-underground-internet-newspapers/) that Russia has been involved
in training repression forces of the regime.

