Last week, two high profile visits brought maternal health care challenges in
Nepal into media spotlight. [Geri
Halliwell](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Geri_Halliwell), member of now defunct
British pop group [Spice Girls](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Spice_Girls) was
in Nepal to draw attention to the country's dismal maternal health care
system.

She did not limit her visit to the capital but went to the country side to
learn more about the issue and called for better care for mothers and new
born.

Well known Hollywood celebrity blogger Perez Hilton
[praised](http://perezhilton.com/2009-09-10-geri-halliwell-aims-to-protect-
women-of-nepal) Halliwell's mission. His post also points to an alarming
statistics of maternal mortality in Nepal.

> “According to the UN, there is a one in 31 mortality rate for Nepalese women
> following child birth due to poor conditions, living in remote areas and the
> condition of uterine prolapse, which affects one in 10 mothers.”

_Geri Halliwell_ received a warm welcome from the people and the Nepalese
government too. But her interaction with Prime Minister Madhav Kumar Nepal
[received](http://sikkimnews.blogspot.com/2009/09/spice-girl-kissing-
controversy-of-nepal.html) some scrutiny from the tabloids. Indian television
network Star TV [tried to
portray](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=x_WAf1lMUOQ&feature=player_embedded)
the customary greeting kiss between Mr. Nepal and Halliwell as
“controversial”.

Viewers though have a different view on the “controversy”. _Shulav83_ at Star
News YouTube Channel
[comments:](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=x_WAf1lMUOQ&feature=player_embedded)

> “Don't make mountain out of a molehill..doesn't india's media have something
> else to report about???”

The Duchess of York Sarah Ferguson's two day visit to Nepal did not create any
such ripples. She was in the country with the _White Ribbon Alliance_ to
promote maternal health.

[Sarah Sanyahumbi](http://blogs.dfid.gov.uk/2009/09/sarah-ferguson-and-the-
life-saving-prime-minister/), head of British development organization DFID's
Nepal division posted about the Duchess’ Nepal visit in the organization's
blog. _Sanyahumbi_ says maternal health care in Nepal is not up to the mark
but things are improving.

> “…despite all the challenges in this country, there has been really good
> progress on this issue and the numbers of women dying in childbirth has
> fallen by nearly half. But still, every four hours in Nepal a woman dies due
> to pregnancy and/or childbirth complications, and 6 in 100 children will not
> see their fifth birthdays…..”.

High maternal mortality rates in Nepal mask another serious health risk to
Nepalese women – Uterine Prolapse. It is a condition where the womb falls out
of the vagina. In western Nepal about 600,000 women suffer from this painful
condition. It happens when a woman returns to hard manual work too soon after
childbirth.

[Here is a
video](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=I4GnT6VT7ms&feature=player_embedded) by
_Sudaron Karki_ on this issue, uploaded by YouTube user
[snowheadcouk](http://www.youtube.com/user/snowheadcouk), with personal
accounts from women who suffer from the condition. (WARNING: GRAPHIC IMAGES)

Visits by Geri Halliwell and the Duchess of York certainly brought the issue
of maternal health in Nepal into media spotlight but it will take more than
high profile celebrity visits to bring relief to Nepalese mothers who suffer
because of deep seated prejudice and lack of awareness.

