Two months ago, [we published the
story](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2009/07/22/democracy-video-challenge-
winner-showcase/) of the winners of the 2009 Democracy Now Challenge with
their videos telling the world what Democracy means for them. Currently these
same winners are on a two week trip around the USA, visiting Washington, New
York and Hollywood, and in the meantime, the Secretary of State has already
announced the[ 2010 Democracy Now Video
Contest](http://www.videochallenge.america.gov/index.html).

[The rules](http://www.videochallenge.america.gov/rules.html) are very similar
to last year's. Basically, you should enter a video that's less than 3 minutes
long which completes the phrase “Democracy is…”. It should either be in
English or have English subtitles, and it can be any style: animated or live
action, a documentary or fiction. The deadline for submitting entries is
January 31st, 2010; after which a selection process will take place including
community voting until 6 contestants from 6 different geographical regions are
chosen, and they will be the ones to travel to the USA to speak with people
from government and media.

Here is the[ video ](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=7EWygOip1dA)they have made
to promote the contest:

The contest is a collaboration between YouTube, the State Department and other
partners, and more details about specifics to be considered before submitting
the video can be found on the [State Department's YouTube channel
](http://www.youtube.com/user/DemocracyChallenge)by clicking on Important
Details.

On the YouTube blog you can view a clip from the [2009 winners’ television
appearance](http://youtube-global.blogspot.com/2009/09/first-round-of-
democracy-definers-find.html), and if you wish to know a bit more about the
winners, 4 of them submitted a video portrait of themselves.

[Aissa Peñafiel](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=QkkFwt48cwI) from the
Philippines:

[Rodin Hamidi ](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=OUN0RL4GML0)from Iran:

[Anna Israel ](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=H9DlhPmA78o)from Brazil:

and [Lukasz Szozda](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=YF7S6MFdy_0) from Poland:

Need inspiration to participate? [Why not take a look at the 2009 winning
entries](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2009/07/22/democracy-video-challenge-
winner-showcase/)?

