[Superaquello](http://www.superaquello.com/) is one of [Puerto
Rico](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Puerto_Rico)‘s most beloved alternative
bands. Their experimental mix of traditional pop, electronic music, and
typical Puerto Rican rhythms have hypnotized music lovers since the band was
born in 1997. The enchanting voices of Patricia Dávila and Eduardo Alegría,
the guitar of Francis Pérez, the bass of Jorge Castro, and Pablo Santiago's
keyboard and programming have provided the Puerto Rican musical scene a breath
of fresh air. They have shared the stage with well-known groups like [Café
Tacvba](http://www.cafetacuba.com.mx/web/), singer [Ely
Guerra](http://www.elyguerra.com/), both from Mexico, and the Argentinian
singer-songwriter [Juana Molina. ](http://www.juanamolina.com/)

![Superaquello](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2009/09/1-SPQE-300x198.jpg)

Photo by A. Garzola, published with permission of Superaquello.

Superaquello has four albums, all of which can be heard on their website: “Mu
Psiqui Ta” (2002), “Bien Gorgeous” (2003), “La Emergencia” (2004), and the
soundtrack of the movie [“Ladrones y
Mentirosos”](http://www.ladronesymentirosos.com/esp/index.html) (2006). These
days, their loyal fans anxiously await the arrival of their new album
“Superaquello interpreta Latarde,” scheduled to be released on September 18
and 19 at the cultural venue [La
Respuesta](http://www.larespuestapr.com/#/about_us), in Santurce, Puerto Rico.
But lately, Superaquello has been experimenting with something more than
music: the Internet. Last Spring, they pre-released half of their new album's
songs to be downloaded free on their website. They also have an active Twitter
[account](http://twitter.com/Superaquello) where they maintain an interesting
dialogue with their followers.

  
_“Cuerdo”, by Superaquello._

On behalf of Global Voices, I interviewed the bassist [Jorge
Castro](http://castrosound.blogspot.com/) [ES], who also oversees their
website, about the band's incursion into cyberspace.

**Global Voices-GV:** Why did you decide to offer your music free on the
Internet before its official release? Do you know of other Puerto Rican bands
that are doing this? What were the public's reactions to this cyberexperiment?

**Jorge Castro-JC:** The songs could be downloaded for free during three weeks
last April. We posted the first half of the CD. We did it because we really
wanted to present our new material, because we had not recorded an album since
2005 (even though we did the soundtrack for “Ladrones y Mentirosos” in 2006)…
This was the first time we did this and I am not sure if we will do it again.
Probably in a couple of years when the model of the music industry completely
fails, we may try it again. The public's reaction was very positive. The music
was free, so it must have been heard in places that we may never even know of.
In the future, surely we will create other projects that will only be offered
virtually…I understand that many Puerto Rican bands are doing the same thing.
[Ignacio Peña](http://www.myspace.com/ignaciopr), for example, offered a
couple of his songs through [pulsorock.com](http://www.pulsorock.com/), and he
is also the first Puerto Rican rock artist with an iPhone application.  

**GV:** Since when do you have a website? I saw that you have all of your
songs posted on the site. What benefits have you gained from having such an
updated and interactive website?

**JC:** I am not sure, but I think superaquello.com exists since 2000. The
website has been wonderful, we have gained much more than through
[MySpace](http://www.myspace.com/superaquello) or our
[Facebook](http://www.facebook.com/search/?q=superaquello&init=quick#/group.php?gid=3188375051)
account. All of our albums are sold through the website, either you can buy
the CD or the MP3, and you can listen to all the songs for free, although in
an inferior quality than the original versions. We are lucky that we sell a
lot of our albums through the website. It is truly an important space of
direct support of artists.

![](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2009/09/14-SPQE-196x300.jpg)

Photo by A. Garzola, published with permission of Superaquello.

**GV:** You have a very active [Twitter
account](http://twitter.com/Superaquello). What do you use it for? What has
the use of Twitter offered the band?

**JC:** Twitter is a very interesting tool to send “micronews”, directly and
without the need of intermediaries, to your followers. Of course, everything
you write has to be personal. It can't be the same thing that your public
relations manager wrote. Each word should come directly from the artist. Our
designer Alfonso Arzola wrote an article about this called [“Social Media is
not Plug & Play”](http://sub.agarzola.com/social-media-is-not-plug-play/)
where he talks about the most common errors committed when you do not use
these tools correctly.

  
_“Pecho e’ Paloma”, by Superaquello_

**GV:** The Internet is considered a space of freedom that permits the
transgression of traditional boundaries, especially regarding music. What do
you think about this?

**JC:** I think that nowadays it's too easy to be everywhere in the Internet.
Most of the content is user-generated, and even though this was foretold years
ago, few people could envision it. For independent music (that is not
supported by major multinational companies) it's a challenge and a blessing at
the same time. We are blessed that our music can get to thousands, maybe even
millions, of people from all over the world. But it is also a challenge
because it is more difficult than ever to stand out when so many artists have
access to the same media, from the most famous to the more obscure. We are
lucky that we have a good number of followers, much before the explosion of
new media, and the transition has been easy.

