**_This post is part of our special coverage[Egypt Revolution
2011](https://globalvoicesonline.org/specialcoverage/egypt-protests-2011/)._**

This [first part of a
documentary](http://www.narconews.com/nntv/video.php?vid=40) on the Egyptian
Revolution tells it from the perspective of blogger and viral video producer
Aalam Wassef, focusing on how online video and other media accompanied a
process of civilian unrest.

The [documentary was produced by
_NarcoNews_](http://www.narconews.com/nntv/video.php?vid=40), a website
reporting on the war on drugs and democracy in Latin America, who also hosted
the [School of Authentic
Journalism](http://www.narconews.com/Issue67/article4414.html) back in May of
this year, when the video was launched.

Although the focus was Latin America, Egypt seems to have been a main focus of
this year's program: a session focused on the [Egyptian revolution as told by
key characters](http://www.narconews.com/Issue67/article4427.html) in the
process, and also by the media who was at [ground zero in Tahrir Square
telling the story](http://narconews.com/Issue67/article4426.html) to the rest
of the world.

The video is described as a manual on how a civil resistance was built to win,
and follows the history of unrest in Egypt going back several years. Aalam
Wassef tells his story of how he started posting videos under a pseudonym back
in 2007 criticizing the government, and how they became viral.

But it wasn't just luck: Wassef, blogging under different assumed names, would
also publish blog posts, get advertising spaces on Google's search engine and
in short, ensure that whomever could get his message, would. And then, to go
onto the “real” world, press.

Although he explains how his efforts were centered on raising Egyptians’
awareness, it was until _BBC_ picked up one of his stories that he realized
that 28 years after [Hosni
Mubarak's](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hosni_Mubarak) rise into power that
the message was finally getting through and crossing borders, reaching far
beyond the 10% of the Egyptian population with Internet access. The video is
also available [in Spanish](http://youtu.be/zcXRfYjD5DQ).

After other successful viral campaigns, they found themselves going to a
revolution along thousands of fellow Egyptians with one common goal: ending
the regime. [This next video](http://vimeo.com/18472608), sent out 20 days
before the revolution started might have been the pebble that started the
landslide. At the end of it there's a brief message telling everyone to take
their friends, head out to the streets and yell Down with Mubarak and on
January 25, 2011, they did.

The work of Egyptians who wish to rebuild their country is far from done: they
continue their efforts from their blogs, media and on the streets. Aalam
Wassef does the same from his different websites:
[two](http://www.youtube.com/ahmadsherif) YouTube
[accounts](http://www.youtube.com/aalamwassef), a[
blog](http://ahmadsherif.wordpress.org) and his [online artist
porfolio](http://www.000-001.net/). As Wassef concludes in the documentary:

> Democracy is not something you get, it is something you aim at because you
> never get 100% democracy… each one has to wake up in the morning thinking
> that this revolution depends on him or her. This is how it works, this is
> what makes a revolution succeed. If each one of us has the impression that
> if he or she doesn't do something about it, that it's gone. And I do wake up
> with this feeling every morning.

**_This post is part of our special coverage[Egypt Revolution
2011](https://globalvoicesonline.org/specialcoverage/egypt-protests-2011/)._**

