_**This post is part of our special coverage[Egypt Revolution
2011](https://globalvoicesonline.org/specialcoverage/egypt-protests-2011/).**_

The date June 6, 2010, was perhaps a turning point for a lot of Egyptians. On
that day, a 27-year-old businessman named Khaled Said [died in disputed
circumstances in the Sidi Gaber area of
Alexandria](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Death_of_Khaled_Mohamed_Saeed), after
being arrested by Egyptian police.

[WARNING: GRAPHIC IMAGE IN THE FOLLOWING LINK] [A photo of his disfigured
corpse](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Khalid-Saeed.jpg), which surfaced on
the Internet, sparked anger and protests that contributed, seven months later,
to the fall of President Hosni Mubarak.

Now, a year on, what he stands for is still alive; thousands of Egyptians
demonstrated all over Egypt not just to commemorate the first anniversary of
his death, but to voice their anger over what they describe as continued
police brutality and torture.

Frustration with police performance rose to new levels after [several cases
](http://www.almasryalyoum.com/en/node/463257)of alleged [torture and
killings](http://www.almasryalyoum.com/en/node/465247) by members of the
police were reported during the last couple of weeks.

And while Egyptians flocked to the streets to take part in silent gatherings
in cities like [Port
Said](http://www.facebook.com/photo.php?fbid=206046239445248&set=a.104265636289976.2684.104224996294040&type=1&ref=nf),
[Aswan](http://www.facebook.com/photo.php?fbid=206132379436634&set=a.104265636289976.2684.104224996294040&type=1&ref=nf)
and
[Asuit](http://www.facebook.com/photo.php?fbid=205981699451702&set=a.104265636289976.2684.104224996294040&type=1&ref=nf)
for Khaled Said, protesters in Alexandria and Cairo in particular, took
matters to another level.

In Alexandria, protesters [gathered in front of Khaled Said’s
house](http://www.facebook.com/photo.php?fbid=206024529447419&set=a.104265636289976.2684.104224996294040&type=1&ref=nf),
chanting against the police and demanding swift justice and maximum punishment
for his killers. [Artists created yet another mural for Said on Alexandria’s
Corniche for everyone to
see](http://www.facebook.com/photo.php?fbid=206015939448278&set=a.104265636289976.2684.104224996294040&type=1&theater).

But it was Cairo that managed to hit a home-run with hundreds demonstrating
right at the gates of the previously feared and notorious Ministry of
Interior, chanting fiercely against police, torture and even the Minister of
Interior (MOI) Mansour El Eissawi himself.

Blogger and activist [Hossam El Hamalawy](http://twitter.com/#!/3arabawy)
provides [photos](http://elhamalawy.purephoto.com/#/collection/1843) of the
demonstration, including the highlight moment when some activists sprayed
stencils of Khaled Said, designed by artist Hussam Shukrallah, all over the
gates of the ministry and the surrounding walls.

Bloggers, tweeps and activists rushed to post pictures of what they described
as a “historic” moment, as Khaled Said’s face covered virtually every wall of
the MOI gates.

[![](http://mediacdn.purephoto.com/a1297_17355_eRu7nF_250.jpg)](http://elhamalawy.purephoto.com/#/image/1843/17355)

Journalist and blogger Sarah Carr was among the first to [post
pictures](http://twitter.com/#!/Sarahcarr/status/77784000315400192) on Twitter
of the stencils on the Interior Ministry. She exclaims:

> [@Sarahcarr](http://twitter.com/#!/Sarahcarr/status/77784000315400192 "أبو
> كار"): Wow wow wow. Khaled Said graffiti on MOI. Fuck the
> police.<http://yfrog.com/gy3sjfdj>

Now for some, the demonstration was an indicator of how far they’ve come since
[this photo](http://lockerz.com/s/108239885) was taken. As journalist Rasha
Azab [puts it:](http://twitter.com/#!/RashaPress/status/77872750479425537)

> For the sake of Khaled Said we went down to confront the Ministry of
> Interior last year and today we painted his pictures on the walls of that
> ministry that we dared not come close to its street. Glory to Khaled and all
> martyrs.

But for others, the fight for a torture-free Egypt remains a challenge even
after the January 25 revolution and as reports of human rights violations
continue to surface from inside Egyptian police stations, the momentum behind
Khaled Said's legacy will not fade anytime soon.

_**This post is part of our special coverage[Egypt Revolution
2011](https://globalvoicesonline.org/specialcoverage/egypt-protests-2011/).**_

**Photo Credit:**  
Anti-Torture protest in front of the Interior Ministry, on the first
anniversary of Khaled Said's death. Image by [Hossam el-
Hamalawy](http://elhamalawy.purephoto.com/#/image/1843/17355), used with
permission, shows the stencils the Khalid Said graffiti on the ministry's
walls.

