**_This post is part of our special coverage[Tunisia Revolution
2011](https://globalvoicesonline.org/specialcoverage/tunisia-
uprising-201011/)._**

Ever since the ousting of former president Zeine El-Abbidine Ben Ali,
Tunisians have been looking forward for one thing: free and fair elections,
which to them represent the only guarantee for a transition to democracy. On
March 3, Interim President Foued Mbezaa
[announced](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2011/03/04/tunisia-a-
reconciliation-between-the-people-and-the-government/) that on July 24
Tunisians will cast their votes to elect a constituent assembly. Recently,
however, many started to express their worries that logistically speaking the
country is not ready yet to organize its first ever free and fair elections,
and news about delaying the elections started to spread.

On May 22, the head of the independent election committee Kamel Jandoubi
[proposed the delay of the
elections](http://af.reuters.com/article/tunisiaNews/idAFLDE74L0A720110522) to
October 16. The chairman of the committee claims that the reasons are mainly
logistic and technical, and that the country “lacks in adequate conditions for
organizing elections on July 24 as planned.”

[![](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2011/05/100_0479.jpg)](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2011/05/100_0479.jpg)

[No for Postponing the Elections
](http://fatmaarabicca.blogspot.com/2011/05/blog-post_5476.html)

On May 23, following a cabinet meeting, the government issued a statement in
which it expressed its commitment to July 24 as the day of elections. Later on
the same day, the committee again insisted on postponing the elections.

In the midst of this disagreement, the street is in total loss and confusion,
as uncertainty hovers around the exact date of the elections, and the
responsible parties seem unable to reach an agreement.

> [@Atriki:](http://twitter.com/#!/Atriki/status/73113768380477440)Le ping-
> pong continue entre gvt et #IIE. L'1 insiste sur le maintien, l'otre sur le
> report wa7na nkawrou binethom #TnElec

The game of ping pong continues between the government and the committee in
charge of the elections. The first is for keeping the original date, and the
second is for delay, and we are a ball between the two

> [@MoezTwit:](http://twitter.com/#!/MoezTwit/status/73110263779438592)Bon on
> peut espérer que d'ici le 24 Juillet ils se mettent d'accord sur la date des
> élection ?

Let's hope that by July 24, they will reach an agreement about the date of the
elections

