_**This post is part of our special coverage[Forest Focus:
Amazon](https://globalvoicesonline.org/specialcoverage/forest-focus-amazon/)
and [Global Development
2011](https://globalvoicesonline.org/specialcoverage/un-millennium-
development-goals-in-2011/).**_

Across the past few weeks, the Brazilian National Congress has been abuzz with
the pressure to vote on a new Forestry Code. The project based on proposed
changes of the existing Code is backed by a coalition of Deputies of the so-
called “Ruralist Front”. The proposed Code [raised
controversy](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2010/08/12/brazil-new-forestry-
code-the-right-to-deforestation) in mid-2010, as well as in December of the
same year, when the matter was rushed forth [while environmentalists were away
in Cancún](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2010/12/15/brazil-key-player-at-
cop-16-but-bad-example-at-home/) for the COP 16.

The proposal under discussion establishes a new management scheme for forests
and protected environmental areas in all 6 biomes of Brazil:
[Caatinga](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Caatinga),
[Cerrado](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cerrado),
[Pampas](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pampas), [Atlantic
Forest](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mata_Atl%C3%A2ntica),
[Pantanal](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pantanal) and the
[Amazon](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Amazon_Rainforest). The rationale
driving the project is that agribusiness is hindered by the existing Code and
Brazil is missing out on opportunities for economic development.

[![A truckload of timber leaves the Amazon. -- Deforestation and the timber
industry on the Amazon. Photo by Christian Franz Tragni, copyright Demotix
\(18/02/2009\)](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2011/05/Amazon-
Deforestation-680x1024.jpg)](http://www.demotix.com/photo/22211/amazon-
deforestation)

A truckload of timber leaves the Amazon. — Deforestation and the timber
industry on the Amazon. Photo by Christian Franz Tragni, copyright Demotix
(18/02/2009)

**Forestry Code**

The proposed Forestry Code fashions a ‘consolidated rural area’ approach with
many controversial features: making all cultivated areas legal (granting
amnesty to those responsible for deforestation that created them); reducing
the amount of riparian or stream-side zones to be protected (called ‘várzeas’
and ‘igapós’ in Portuguese); allowing occupation and use of areas above 1,800
m (which are currently protected) for agriculture; changing the parameters for
Permanent Preservation Area (APP) to be replaced by new statutes created in
each Brazilian State; eliminating the native reserve requirement in small
properties; permits replanting of degraded areas with exotic plants (instead
of only native species); allowing compensation for a devastated land with a
protected area elsewhere (i.e. a devastated area in the Atlantic Forest could
be compensated by a protected area in the Cerrado); and making it no longer
compulsory to restore damaged native reserve on small properties.

Rumor has it that the version presented by the federal deputy from the
Communist Party [Aldo Rebelo](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Aldo_Rebelo) to
Congress on May 10, 2011, had its draft finalized just moments before the call
to vote. The rumor made the voting session be adjourned as the version wasn’t
available for appreciation. Former Minister of Environment and presidential
candidate [Marina Silva](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Marina_Silva)
(@silva_marina) [tweeted on May
10](http://twitter.com/#!/silva_marina/status/68081875264090112) [pt]:

> Não se sabe quais propostas da sociedade e do governo estão no relatório do
> Aldo. Será um desrespeito se o Código Florestal for votado hoje.

It is unknown which proposals made by [civil] society and by the government
are in Aldo’s report. It will be disrespectful if the Forestry Code is voted
today.

On May 12, as deputies mentioned Marina Silva's message to demand more time to
study the report, Aldo Rebelo accused Mrs. Silva's husband of illegal logging.
He also stated that he had “spared” Mrs. Silva's husband, as had decided not
to press charges.

Based on this statement, which was aired on television, [YouTube user
CiFuDetube](http://www.youtube.com/user/CiFuDetube) (acronym for Citizenship,
Future and Democracy) advised netizens to call for Aldo Rebelo’s impeachment,
as he had publicly confessed misconduct.

<http://youtu.be/vXaYzt2PQnQ>

**Agribusiness, the future of Brazilian economy?**

[According to journalist João
Peres](http://www.redebrasilatual.com.br/temas/ambiente/2011/05/relator-do-
codigo-florestal-no-senado-recebeu-doacoes-de-madeireiras-e-carboniferas)
[pt], writing for _Rede Brasil Atual_ , the “ruralist front” is made up of 170
deputies and 18 senators who openly support agribusiness and in some cases are
farmers themselves. Deputy Kátia Abreu is a well-known member of the ruralist
front, being a large producer in the meat industry. Since 2008, she has been
the president of the Brazilian Confederation of Agriculture and Livestock
(CNA) and is eager to see the new Code approved.

Abreu (@KatiaAbreu)
[tweeted](http://twitter.com/#!/KatiaAbreu/status/70128774573850624) [pt] that
the “modernization of the Forestry Code is being set in a democratic and
responsible manner”. She also [tweeted in defense of her
efforts](http://twitter.com/#!/KatiaAbreu/status/70128039886979072) [pt]:

> Não somos desmatadores. Não exploramos madeira em reserva ambiental. Somos
> produtores de alimentos. Sustentamos o Brasil.
> [#codigoflorestalja](http://twitter.com/#!/search?q=%23codigoflorestalja)

We are not loggers. We do not exploit wood in environmental reserve. We are
food producers. We support Brazil. #codigoflorestalja [forestrycodenow]

During the COP 16, Deputy Abreu (member of the Social Democrat Party) was
awarded the[ Golden
Chainsaw](http://www.greenpeace.org/brasil/pt/Noticias/A-Cesar-o-que-e-de-
Cesar-/) [pt] by Greenpace Brazil, in recognition of “her efforts towards
deforestation”.

[![Rise in deforestation in the Amazon Rainforest - The Brazilian Amazon
rainforest had 5.850 km2 of its legal area deforested from August 2009 to
April 2010, according to INPE- Instituto de Pesquisas Espaciais. Photo by
Ronnie Luis Leite, copyright Demotix
\(20/11/2007\).](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2011/05/rise-in-deforestation-in-the-amazon-
rainsforest-1024x768.jpg)](http://www.demotix.com/photo/418262/rise-
deforestation-amazon-rainforest)

Rise in deforestation in the Amazon Rainforest – The Brazilian Amazon
rainforest had 5.850 km2 of its legal area deforested from August 2009 to
April 2010, according to INPE- Instituto de Pesquisas Espaciais. Photo by
Ronnie Luis Leite, copyright Demotix (20/11/2007).

Deputy Aldo Rebelo, member of the Communist Party of Brazil (PCdoB), is the
rapporteur (sponsor) responsible for the new Forestry Code proposed in
Congress. Mr. Rebelo has taken an uncompromising stand for the project.
Despite his alliance with the [Dilma
Rousseff](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dilma_Rousseff) administration, he has
shown deeper affinity with the proposal backed by the ruralist front rather
then the less aggressive one backed by the Presidential Administration.

Rafael Chiaravalloti [writes on his blog](http://diariodoverde.com/o-codigo-
florestal-e-as-coisas-chatas-da-vida/) _Diário do Verde_ (Green Daily) [pt]
about the harmful effects of the new Forestry Code project and calls Aldo
Rebelo a puppet doll:

> Aldo Rebelo, um ex-militante da luta pela democracia na época que os
> militares criaram o código, é apenas uma marionete desse processo.

Aldo Rebelo, former activist in the struggle for democracy against the
military rule – during which the code was created – is merely a puppet doll in
this process.

**Environmentalists and scientists reject proposal**

Concerned with the powerful forces behind the new Forestry Code, environmental
NGOs like Greenpeace Brazil and WWF-Brazil and institutes such as ISA –
Instituto Socioambiental (Socio-Environmental Institute) – and IPAM –
Instituto de Pesquisa Ambiental da Amazônia (Environmental Research Institute
of the Amazon) – joined their forces in 2010 to fight against the new Code.
The website [SOS Florestas](http://www.sosflorestas.com.br/) (SOS Forests)
[pt] aims at offering content to correct the currently widespread
misinformation. The argument is that [there have been
lies](http://www.sosflorestas.com.br/verdades_mentiras.php) [pt] about the way
the new Forest Code was elaborated and it is necessary to publicize the
potential negative effect on ecosystems in Brazil.

The initiative created an [online
petition](http://www.avaaz.org/po/peticao_codigo_florestal/?sos) [pt] with
Avaaz to maintain the current Forestry Code. On Twitter, the hashtag
#SOSFlorestas is used and [a
video](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=p_3tXpu1-IM) [pt] has been produced to
inform about the harmful possibilities of the proposed new code, especially in
regards to ending the compulsory reserve of original forest on small
properties, and the lower restriction of areas of permanent protection on
hills and riversides, which has [huge impacts on
cities](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2011/01/16/brazil-flooding-in-the-
mountainous-region-of-rio-de-janeiro-devastated-cities/).

The Brazilian Society for the Progress of Science (SBPC) and the Brazilian
Academy of Science (ABC) have come forward to argue for a [two-year
moratorium](http://www.sbpcnet.org.br/site/arquivos/arquivo_299.pdf) [pt] on
the Forestry Code dialog in Congress. Both institutions agree the Code must be
changed, but argue the current proposals lack the scientific data basis needed
for new determinations of native reserve, for the adjustment of protected
areas on riversides and other changes.

**“Aldo Effect”: Deforestation is going up**

Just a few days ago, Instituto Centro de Vida (ICV) and Imazon, institutions
that conduct research and advocate for the sustainable management of Brazilian
biomes, [reported that
deforestation](http://www.amazonia.org.br/noticias/noticiacfm?id=384328) [pt]
went up in the state of Mato Grosso, against the previous trend of lower
deforestation rates:

> Em abril de 2011 o desmatamento atingiu 243 quilometros quadrados em Mato
> Grosso, o que corresponde a aumento expressivo de 537% em relação a abril de
> 2010 quando o desmatamento somou apenas 38 quilometros quadrados.

In April 2011, deforestation reached 243 km2 in Mato Grosso, which corresponds
to an impressive increase of 537% compared to April 2010, when deforestation
reached an area of 38 km2.

You can [see maps and graphics
here](http://www.amazonia.org.br/arquivos/384327.pdf) [pt] comparing
deforestation rates in Mato Grosso over the past four years. As journalist
[Leonardo Sakamato
argues](http://blogdosakamoto.uol.com.br/2011/05/04/proposta-de-codigo-
florestal-provoca-corrida-ao-desmatamento/), this is a race to deforest areas,
as the new Forestry Code will provide farmers with amnesty. Environmentalists
have named it the “Aldo Effect”.

[!["Protect our woods - Save the Forest Code" Photo from the blog of the
AASPAFF \(Association for Social Action and Conservation of Water, Fauna and
Flora of the northern Chapada\), used with
permission.](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2011/05/protect-our-
forest-375x249.jpg)](http://aspaffchapadanorte.blogspot.com/2011/05/aspaff-
chapada-norte-realiza.html)

"Protect our woods – Save the Forest Code" Photo from the blog of the AASPAFF
(Association for Social Action and Conservation of Water, Fauna and Flora of
the northern Chapada), used with permission.

Demonstrations have taken place in other parts of the country, as in the
[small town of
Jacobina](http://aspaffchapadanorte.blogspot.com/2011/05/aspaff-chapada-norte-
realiza.html), Bahia. SOS Florestas is urging citizens to attend a [massive
demonstration this Sunday](http://www.sosflorestas.com.br/index.php?a=264),
May 22, in São Paulo.

_**This post is part of our special coverage[Forest Focus:
Amazon](https://globalvoicesonline.org/specialcoverage/forest-focus-amazon/)
and [Global Development
2011](https://globalvoicesonline.org/specialcoverage/un-millennium-
development-goals-in-2011/).**_

This article was proofread by [Lou
Gold](https://globalvoicesonline.org/author/lou-gold/).

