Costa Rica celebrated the [International Day Against
Homophobia](http://www.homophobiaday.org/) on May 17, and both online and
offline people celebrated sexual diversity.

[![Puppy at the Pride Parade. Image by @jdclarke00 used with
permission.](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2011/05/218503_10150589934325075_513950074_18467863_7993821_o-375x250.jpg)](http://twitter.com/#!/jdclarke00)

Puppy at the Pride Parade. Image by @jdclarke00 used with permission.

On Sunday May 15, the gay pride festival took place in the capital city of San
Jose. [Mauricio Rojas](http://youtu.be/n4AO3EYR7lQ) [es] made a video showing
the highlights of the event including music, vendor stands, dancing and
speeches:

The festival was organized as part of the initiative the City of San Jose has
begun to make the city free of discrimination, in this specific case, against
people of diverse sexual orientation, as was stated in the press conference
[announcing the festival](http://youtu.be/ZHzFZoU-qgk) [es].

Humorous webshow [I can't pronounce the R](http://youtu.be/sryicHs7rlM) [es]
also produced a video for the day, in this case, mocking Juan Jose Vargas, a
Costarican politician turned preacher [who last year](http://www.informa-
tico.com/index.php.nuevo?scc=articulo&edicion=20100518&ref=17-05-100006) [es]
made the news by advertising his center for healing people of homosexuality.

In this video, they make a fake interview with Juan Nose Vainas (Juan I Don't
Know Stuff) where he shows the results of the treatment: consisting of
training his students in catcalls, fighting for men, oggling men and walking
in high heels for women and “getting lucky” with the opposite sex.

[Blog _ChepeStyle_](http://www.chepestyle.com/2011/05/festival-del-orgullo-
costa-rica-2011.html) [es], which writes about events in San Jose, was also at
the Festival. E. Fernandez wrote a narrative of the event which includes
[pictures](http://www.chepestyle.com/2011/05/festival-del-orgullo-costa-
rica-2011.html) and the following insight:

> Estar ahí me hizo entender un poco más porqué el arcoíris es considerado
> símbolo de la comunidad LGBT (Lesbiana, Gay, Bisexual y Transgénero). Como
> decimos por acá para gustos hay colores y este símbolo nos llama a apreciar
> la diversidad y belleza de todos los colores… y todos los gustos.

Being there made me understand a bit more why the rainbow is considered a
symbol of the LGBT (Lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender) community. As we
say around here, for each taste there's a color and this symbol calls us to
appreciate diversity and beauty in all colors… and all tastes.

