Danish nationalist right wing party, The Danish People’s Party (Dansk
Folkeparti/DF), recently announced the re-introduction of controls at the
country's borders with Germany and Sweden. The centre-right minority
government in Copenhagen capitulated and the proposal went through.

The Danish decision came as a surprise to many because it was taken only few
hours before an emergency European Union (EU) meeting focused on immigration
and the [Schengen Agreement](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Schengen_Agreement).
The treaty was signed in 1985 and in 2001 Denmark decommissioned its border
control at the German border.

[![Borderline between Sweden and Denmark on the Øresunds Bridge. Image by
Flickr user mollenborg.com \(CC BY 2.0\).](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2011/05/Swedish-Danish-
border-375x281.jpg)](http://www.flickr.com/photos/mollenborg/4695106187/)

Borderline between Sweden and Denmark on the Øresunds Bridge. Image by Flickr
user mollenborg.com (CC BY 2.0).

The border-free region counts more than 22 EU countries plus Switzerland,
Liechtenstein, Norway and Iceland. It goes from Portugal to Russia's borders
on the Baltic, and from Reykjavik to Turkey's border with Greece.

There were calls in the European Parliament to cut Denmark out of the Schengen
regime in light of the new border policy. But the Danish government has
promised that border and customs checks will not extend to passport controls,
and that this remains compliant with Schengen.

The European Commission is now working to find out whether Denmark complies
with international law. Meanwhile the German government has protested that the
open border should not be [sacrificed for domestic political
reasons](http://politiken.dk/politik/ECE1280386/tysk-indenrigsminister-man-
kan-ikke-isolere-sig-inden-for-eu/) [da] and [Sweden has called it a
scandal](http://www.guardian.co.uk/world/2011/may/12/europe-to-end-passport-
free-travel).

**Tight anti-immigration policy**

[![Logo from the Facebook page ‘What about shutting your ass instead of
shutting the borders’.](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2011/05/grænse-138x300.jpg)](http://www.facebook.com/home.php?#!/lukroven)

Logo from the Facebook page ‘What about shutting your ass instead of shutting
the borders’.

Denmark has developed extremely tight anti-immigration laws within the last
ten years and this increasing far-right discourse seem to have spread across
the EU – to Italy, France and the Netherlands.

It might also have been triggered by a fear for the migrant consequences of
the [Arab Spring](http://www.sourcewatch.org/index.php?title=Arab_Spring)
protests earlier this year.

A Facebook group called ‘[Border Police Back in
Denmark](http://www.facebook.com/home.php?#%21/pages/Gr%C3%A6nsepoliti-
tilbage-i-DK/160021130675977)’ (Grænsepoliti tilbage i DK) [da] has 2,324
members and has supported the DF border initiative with comments such as “Now
we can sleep soundly a night”.

‘[What about shutting your ass instead of shutting the
borders](http://www.facebook.com/home.php?#%21/lukroven?sk=info)’ (Hvad med at
lukke røven i stedet for at lukke grænserne) [da] is the name of another
Facebook group – one against the proposal – which has 6,263 members and
counting.

Here is some of the unsatisfied comments from Facebook and Twitter:

> [Lars Rosgaard:](http://www.facebook.com/profile.php?id=804038573)
> Symbolpolitik er desværre den eneste form for politik, der i øjeblikket
> praktiseres i DK

Lars Rosgaard: Symbolic politics is the only politics in Denmark at the moment

> [Lena Olsen](http://www.facebook.com/profile.php?id=100000414931828):
> Valgflæsk for DF (…). Jeg er bare så træt af de tosser

Lena Olsen: A sop to the electors from DF (…). I’m so sick of those idiots

> [Jakob Ellekjær:](http://www.facebook.com/profile.php?id=599113569) Det der
> ødelægger det her land, er dem der styrer det.

Jakob Ellekjær: What ruins this country is those ruling it

> [@trinemaria](http://twitter.com/#%21/trinemaria/status/68392842342567936):
> [@umbraco](http://twitter.com/umbraco) Det er SÅ dumt med den grænsekontrol
> at jeg seriøst overvejer ikke at vende tilbage, hvis jeg slipper igennem!

@trinemaria: @umbraco It is so STUPID with that border control that I'm
seriously considering not coming back if I get through!

