**_This post is part of our special coverage[Global Development
2011](https://globalvoicesonline.org/specialcoverage/un-millennium-
development-goals-in-2011/)._**

The[ Google Science Fair project
](http://www.google.com/events/sciencefair/index.html)semi finalist listings
are up. Although it was open to teens between 13 and 18 years from all over
the world, it is interesting to note that the United States, Singapore and
India take the majority of spots amongst the 60 selected semi finalists, which
also includes entries from New Zealand, South Africa, the United Kingdom and
Canada.

The winner of the[ amazing Grand
Prize](http://www.google.com/events/sciencefair/prizes.html) – which includes
a National Geographic expedition and 50,000 US dollar (USD) scholarship – will
come from this crop of 60 talented young scientists: judges will select 15
finalists who will fly to the US where they will present their project, before
the winner is chosen. The semi-finalist who gets the most votes will win the
People's Choice Award and a USD 10,000 scholarship.

[![](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-content/uploads/2011/05/science-fair-
screenshot-375x203.jpg)](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2011/05/science-fair-screenshot.jpg)

Screenshot of Google Science Fair People's Choice Award's Video

The Google Science Fair Project kicked off back in January 2011, with a[
](http://youtu.be/Z7oJfK4E7RY)[video
invitation](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Z7oJfK4E7RY&feature=youtu.be). The
video is based around a fun [Rube Goldberg type of
machine](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Rube_Goldberg_machine) that uses
scientific props and tools to show how science is a universal language. And it
seems to have worked wonderfully: according to the [video announcement
](http://youtu.be/YRHCCzLZCME)to vote for the semi-finalists, more than 7,000
entries were received from 90 different countries.

[Luke
Taylor](http://www.google.com/events/sciencefair/projects/programming_in_pure_e.html)
from South Africa is competing in the 13-14 year old category. In his video
presentation, he explains the process behind teaching a robot how to follow
spoken English instructions:

In India, [Chaithya G. R. and Siri
G.R](http://www.google.com/events/sciencefair/projects/auto_guarded_level_crossing.html).
thought about the increase in accidents at unmanned train crossings which they
suspect is due to lack of signals to let people know a train is coming. They
designed a system which uses magnets and electronics, so that the passing of a
train engages sound and light sensors and deploys a gate as well:

[Chiu Chai
Hao](http://www.google.com/events/sciencefair/projects/the_abilities_of_water_weeds_in_removing_heavy_metal_ions.html)
of Singapore is also intent on saving lives, in his case, by granting access
to clean water free of heavy metal contamination through the use of water
plants:

[Ed.Note.- Author has since removed the project from public view]

[Sahil Sahibole
](http://www.google.com/events/sciencefair/projects/doctors_solar_mate.html)from
India is also interested in the environment. He project focuses on harnessing
solar power to resolve an important issue in health in remote locations: the
lack of electricity to safely sterilize medical instruments in autoclaves:

The team of [Nishanth Kumar, Krishna Betai and Anish V
Malladi](http://www.google.com/events/sciencefair/projects/intravenous_fluid_low_level_alarm_system.html)
of India also focused on medical issues, in this case creating a sensor that
could tell medical practitioners when intravenous fluid levels get low so they
can assist patients better:

There are many other projects by talented young scientists [waiting for your
votes for the People's Choice
Awards](http://www.google.com/events/sciencefair/vote.html). You can vote once
in each age group.

<http://youtu.be/YRHCCzLZCME>

**_This post is part of our special coverage[Global Development
2011](https://globalvoicesonline.org/specialcoverage/un-millennium-
development-goals-in-2011/)._**

