On 18 April, 2011, American non-profit organisation _Freedom House_ issued a
report on Internet freedom in the world. The report, “[Freedom on the Net
2011](http://www.freedomhouse.org/template.cfm?page=664)” analyses freedom of
access to the Internet in 2009-2010 in 37 countries.

In the report (authored by Global Voices’ Alexey Sidorenko, editor of [RuNet
Echo](https://globalvoicesonline.org/-/special/runet-echo/)), Russia is rated
among those countries with “partial freedom” of Internet access. Compared with
the organisation's previous report, published in 2009, Russia's position in
the ratings has dropped.

Among Russia's neighbours on the list of “partly free” countries are Rwanda,
Zimbabwe and Egypt. Of the republics of the former USSR, Freedom House experts
identified Georgia, Azerbaijan and Kazakhstan, along with Russia, as “partly
free.” Belarus appears on the “not free” list, while Estonia is on the “free”
list – in fact, Estonia tops the rankings for all countries mentioned in the
report. Russia's other former Soviet neighbours are absent from the rankings.

Trailing the field on Freedom House's list are Cuba, Burma and Iran, where
experts registered the worst situation regarding Internet freedom.

[![ A map representing internet freedom, from Freedom House's report
](https://ru.globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2011/04/fhmap-375x264.jpg)](https://globalvoicesonline.org/?attachment_id=3621)

A map representing internet freedom, from Freedom House

One cannot argue with the facts listed in the report [about
Russia](http://www.freedomhouse.org/images/File/FotN/Russia2011.pdf). All the
same, questions arise about their analysis and interpretation.

The first important question: What aspects of this ranking really originate
with the authorities or state structures? What exactly is the Russian
authorities’ contribution to “Internet unfreedom?” After all, it is generally
accepted that the restriction of freedom be considered in terms of its
usefulness to the authorities’ policies and functioning of legislation.

If we look carefully at the list, we will see two obvious types of actions
emanating from state structures:

**“E-Centres” to prosecute extremists**

1\. The activities of law enforcement agencies and units within the fight
against extremism (so-called “E-Centres”), which actually direct the
prosecution of bloggers (and not only bloggers) for expressing opinions on the
Internet. More often than not, cases are brought according to Article 282 of
the Penal Code; specifically according to Part 1, which includes penalties for
“activities, carried out in public or via media, aimed at the incitement of
hatred or hostility or the degradation of a person or group of persons on
grounds of gender, race, nationality, language, origin, religious inclination,
or membership in a particular social group.”

I have explained more than once how this mechanism works. E-Centres are the
operational units of the Ministry of Internal Affairs (MIA) in every Russian
region. They carry out the functions of the MIA in the area of counter-
extremism. These units have a “top-down” plan for the fight against extremism:
a certain number of citizens over a certain period of time must be held
accountable for extremist activity.

Where do E-Centres look for extremists? Seeking out those who are plotting
“the formation of extremist organisations” or some other kind of extremist
activity is difficult: for that you need to have informants to carry out
quality surveillance over a long period and collect information and evidence.
That's difficult. It is easier to find “extremists” on the Internet while
sitting at a computer in your office, reading blogs and forums and looking for
sharp, critical opinions of authorities or some social group or other.

It's a cushy job: find a statement and, if its author is somehow identified,
turn your attention toward the Internet service provider to find out whose
computer the message was sent from. That's it. An extremist is rooted out, the
task is carried out, the question is closed, the bosses are happy, a report on
the “fight against extremism” is dispatched to Moscow, and the bill for its
foot soldiers continues to be paid from the state budget.

That is precisely why the Russian Internet community and human rights
activists must fight for the abolition of Article 282 of the Penal Code of the
Russian Federation. As law enforcement practices demonstrate, just about
anybody can fall into the category of “extremist:” bloggers, Internet users,
writers, community activists, religious figures, whoever you like, only to
justify the existence of E-Centres, which previously, by the way, were “Units
for the Fight Against Organised Crime” and have retained their practice of
meeting quotas. It is also necessary, in my opinion, that Centres for the
Fight Against Extremism close, since they are involved in activities that are
beyond their remit: in reality, they prosecute the free expression of
opinions, be they political or religious views.

As regards the prosecution of bloggers, the real reason behind it is often not
a statement by a given person on a blog or on the Internet, but instead his or
her other activities (social, political or commercial). The expression of an
opinion on the Internet acts only as a convenient pretext for the initiation
of pressure or prosecution.

**Blocking Internet resources**

2\. The second action emanating from the state and directed “against the
Internet” involves the judicial system, which, at the instigation of the
public prosecutor's office, can decide to block Internet resources. Yes,
indeed, the court in Komsomolsk-na-Amur city made an utterly illogical [ legal
decision to shut off users’
access](http://centralny.hbr.sudrf.ru/modules.php?name=sud_delo&op=cs&case_id=13285810&delo_id=1540005&case_type=50520001)
to YouTube because the site allegedly hosts extremist materials. Later on, the
court of appeal overturned this decision, identifying specific pages on the
site to which access must be blocked by Internet service providers. Well-known
Russian internet activist Anton Nosik then[ wrote on his
blog](http://dolboeb.livejournal.com/1863075.html) [ru]:

> By the level of its crudeness, the court's verdict is typical of all
> domestic legal proceedings concerning the Internet.” These happenings are,
> in Nosik's opinion, “All in all, only an amusing legal episode that is of no
> practical consequence for tens of millions of Internet users in Russia.

The number of ignorant decisions taken by Russian courts is well known to all,
and they do not only concern the Internet. This area is one the majority of
judges and prosecutors do not understand; they tend to confuse sites
maintained by their owners with services or sites based on user-generated
content (UGC).

Ignorance in relation to the realities of the Internet, however, is not
particular to the activities of judges and prosecutors alone. Not long ago, a
businessman asked a friend who the “editor-in-chief of Twitter” was, and
whether it would be possible to meet him. People's general ignorance regarding
the realities of the Internet leads to such episodes.

The conclusion here is simple: a movement focused on rectifying this lack of
awareness is required, so that rulings about “YouTube shutdown” provoke not
only the indignation of users but also the hearty laughter of the Internet
community that believes an actual YouTube shutdown will not come to pass.

**Untraceable control**

As for the remaining facts contained in the Freedom House report, they may
bear no relation whatsoever to the state and the authorities’ actions – or
may, indirectly. DDoS (Distributed Denial-of-Service) attacks, which in recent
times [threatened](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2011/04/06/russia-ddos-
attack-on-livejournal-has-russians-debating-internet-politics/)
_LiveJournal.com_ and the _Novaya Gazeta_ website cannot be linked to the
state but result from either commercial orders or the unauthorised activities
of certain individuals. The same goes for the hacking of certain sites by the
“Hell Brigade.”

Activity in the blogosphere by “pro-Kremlin youth organisations” is more a
positive than a negative fact, reflecting real freedom of expression by
political forces of different stripes. There is evidence of both liberal and
nationalist activity in the blogosphere: those for Putin, and those against
him; those for Stalin, and those against him; those for Khodorkovsky, and
those against him.

The means of conducting the discussion are, admittedly, not always good: there
are trolling and spamming and _ad hominem_ attacks. But these complaints can
be laid against anybody, not just against “pro-Kremlin forces.” The thing is,
depending on the topic, distinct groups are mobilised differently, so that in
certain discussions (indeed, those that have to do with topics such as Stalin,
Yeltsin, Khodorkovsky, the Russian Orthodox church and others) the better
mobilised groups take part in discussions with greater aggression and fury.

Of course, the purchase of successful services and websites by businessmen
close to the Kremlin can, to a certain extent, be put down to “state
influence.” But it seems to me that we are dealing in these cases with the
usual desire in business to acquire a commercially successful venture.

Moreover, it is difficult to cite an example of owners influencing the
editorial line of _Lenta.ru_ or the ‘editorial’ policy of _LiveJournal_. Blogs
on _LiveJournal_ are completely free, and a [recent period when the site was
down](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2011/04/06/russia-ddos-attack-on-
livejournal-has-russians-debating-internet-politics/) could be attributable
not only to a DDoS attack, but also to unresolved technical problems on the
part of the service itself. Another important factor is a statement by
President Medvedev, who drew attention to the attacks on the popular blog
hosting service and condemned them. The president coming to the defence of a
popular blog hosting service has no precedent in any country.

Yet it is still worth remembering the Kremlin's tough position regarding the
Federal Security Service's (FSB) initiative to ban access to Skype, Gmail and
Hotmail, about which [ I have written in a previous
article](https://ru.globalvoicesonline.org/2011/04/11/3474/). The truth is,
yet another initiative of the Russian government came to light a few days
later: a tender to carry out research into the foreign experience of
regulating responsibility for Internet networks. The research should analyse
the legislation of the USA, Germany, France, the UK and Canada, as well as
China, Belarus and Kazakhstan where, as we know, the Internet is blocked.

On the whole, my conclusion regarding the situation of the Internet in Russia,
as described in the report “Freedom on the Net 2011,” is as follows: yes,
Russia can be included among those countries with “partly free” Internet
access. At the same time, this particular lack of freedom is not due to the
deliberate policies of the federal authorities. At least for the time being,
the authorities are not seeking to limit Internet freedom, and Medvedev's
position on this matter is clear enough. Only Article 282 of the Penal Code
and the activities of the “Centres for the Fight against Extremism” raise a
real concern.

Notwithstanding this, not only Internet users but human rights defenders,
political activists, historians, religious figures and other “troublemakers”
suffer. The Internet here is but a pretext for accusation. Ignorant judges and
prosecutors are trouble too – not only in terms of the Internet but sometimes
in terms of legislation in general, which they themselves do not understand or
interpret terribly. Yet another real problem is that in Russia we are dealing
with a multitude of actors who may engage in violence against bloggers and
activists. This multitude can appear to be an integrated instrument of the
authoritarian state but, if we look closely, it reveals itself as a vector
resulting from the actions of various security agents, bureaucrats and
bandits.

Therefore, to “liberate” the Internet and raise Russia's position in Freedom
House's ratings, the Russian community must turn its attention to Article 282
and start a campaign to have it repealed. This is well within the power of the
Russian Internet community.

