_**This post is part of our special coverage[The Death of Osama Bin
Laden](https://globalvoicesonline.org/specialcoverage/the-death-of-osama-bin-
laden/).**_

[![](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2011/05/image1-375x281.jpg)](http://twitter.com/#!/Kholllouda)

Picture of Khulood Al-Khamis from her Twitter account

So what does it take to make a woman fall in love with someone like Al-Qaeda
leader Osama Bin Laden? Apparently, a long beard, admits Kuwaiti female
columnist Khulood Al-Khamis, who stunned readers with a love letter she wrote
for the terror mastermind, who was killed by the US, in Abbottabad, Pakistan,
this week.

In her letter, in her column in the Kuwaiti Arabic daily [Al-
Qabas](http://www.alqabas.com.kw/Article.aspx?id=700526&date=04052011), Al-
Khamis described Bin Laden as the man of her dreams, describing how she would
have loved going with him to his cave, washing his beard and becoming one of
his wives. She ended her article promising to wait or him in heaven to
continue her [Scheherazade](http://www.answers.com/Scheherazade) tales.

The columnist, who happens to be a [short story
writer](http://www.goodreads.com/book/show/3459385), has an account on
[Twitter ](http://twitter.com/#!/Kholllouda). Her article shocked many
readers. On Twitter, Al-Khamis received a lot of sarcastic mentions, including
from Ayman Zawahari, a parody account of the Al-Qaeda second man, who
[asked](http://twitter.com/#!/AymanZawahri/status/65825200050155520) her a
simple small question:

> شدعوه خلود مالنا رب يعني؟

Oh Khulood, What about me?

Saddam Hussein, another parody account,
[followed](https://twitter.com/#!/saadaamhussain/status/65825791912583168):

> خاتون خلود خميس ، مو آني هم مجرم وچتلت بشر أكثر من أسامه .. ليش ماتفكرين بيا
> ؟!

Lady Khulood Khamis, I'm also a criminal who killed more people than Osama has
killed, why don't you consider me?

Yahya Taleb Ali, a young Kuwaiti writer, wrote yet another sarcastic tweet
[saying](http://twitter.com/#!/Beardist/status/65818704012783616):

> ميخالف شباب، الأخت عبرت عن رأيها وإعجابها بأسامة بن لادن وتبي تمشط لحيته.
> هذا رأي والتعبير عنه حق مكفول. أنا عن نفسي أبي أمشط شنب نيتشه

Come on guys, she is expressing her opinion and crush on Osama Bin Laden; she
wants to brush his beard. That's her opinion and expressing it is a guaranteed
right. I personally would like to brush Nietzsche's mustache.

Another Twitter user, who claims to be a president of Kuwait's upper class
area _Shuwaikh_ , wrote different tweets about Al-Khamis's article, including
this [one](http://twitter.com/#!/ShwaikhRepublic/status/65798803793510402):

> بعد مقالة خلود الخميس..ڤيكتوريا سيكريتس تطرح تصاميم جديدة بعنوان( آآآآه
> فجرني)عبارة عن لنجيري مفخخ بالديناميت للإغراء الإرهابي

After Khulood Al-Khamis recent article, Victoria Secret will launch a new
collection entitled “oh, Bomb Me” consisting of lingerie planted with
terrorist seductive dynamite

Another Kuwaiti female Twitter user, Ghadory, did not hesitate to mock Al-
Khamis, but [this time
](http://twitter.com/#!/Ghadory/status/65933004823986176)in English:

> #kholoudalkhamees (‘Cause Ur a freak, baby) U want it bad, bad romance With
> #OBL I got a whole new perspective on lady gaga song

Molten86 [wrote](http://twitter.com/#!/molten86/status/65818735667183616) with
a serious tone:

> #kholoudalkhamees تبي تشتهر ! بسرعة ! أمدح ظالم إرهابي .. مبروك انت نجم لامع
> الآن

She wants quick fame. Compliment a terrorist tyrant! Congratulations, you're a
star now.

Salman Al-Naqi has also dealt with Al-Khamis's article in a serious way
[saying](http://twitter.com/#!/Al_NaQi/status/66069207737040896):

> أحذروا السلفية الجديدة التي تطل علينا برجال حليقي اللحية و نساء سافرات
> الوجه.. و لنا في الكاتبين بدر البحر و خلود الخميس خير برهان ! #kuwait

Be careful of New Salafism that comes to us with beard shaved men and unveiled
women. Writers Bader Al-Bahar and Khulood Al-Khamis are good examples

_**This post is part of our special coverage[The Death of Osama Bin
Laden](https://globalvoicesonline.org/specialcoverage/the-death-of-osama-bin-
laden/).**_

