_**This post is part of our special coverage[Mexico's Drug
War](https://globalvoicesonline.org/specialcoverage/mexicos-drug-war/).**_

_****_Next Sunday May 8, 2011, Mexican citizens will march to demand the end
to the “War on Drugs” and the removal of all government
officials[responsible](http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/world-latin-america-13290605)
for more than 35,000 deaths and the increase of insecurity and corruption.

Mexican poet Javier Sicilia, who became the leading voice of the discontent
towards the government's method of tackling the drug trafficking problem after
his son Juan Francisco was killed, is inviting all those who want ‘peace and
justice’ to join the protests next Sunday.

Here is Javier Sicilia's message in English:

The protest will start on May 5 in
[Cuernavaca](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cuernavaca), a city close to the
capital where Sicilia's son was killed, and will head all the way to the
National University (UNAM) in Mexico City. Neftali Granados
([@NeftaliGranados)](https://twitter.com/#!/NeftaliGranados/status/65195925655658496)
[es] tweeted the route to follow.

The itinerary for the protest in Mexico[ is available at the official site of
_Red Paz y Justicia_](http://redporlapazyjusticia.org/?p=502) [es] (Peace and
Justice Network). [A Facebook
page](http://www.facebook.com/event.php?eid=100642476690772) [es] has also
been set up with the details. Furthermore, there is another official blog
dedicated to the details of the[ different protests throughout the
country](http://marchanacionalporlapaz.blogspot.com/) [es].

Newspaper _La Jornada_ is fully supporting the protest and publishing
editorials frequently to get the goals of the May 8 protests across. [
](http://www.jornada.unam.mx/2011/05/02/index.php?section=opinion&article=020a2pol)Professor
John M. Ackerman, a strong and respected voice from Mexican civil society,
[writes](http://www.jornada.unam.mx/2011/05/02/index.php?section=opinion&article=020a2pol)
[es]:

> Para que la marcha del domingo tenga un impacto real y un efecto detonador
> expansivo, los que participaremos en ella estamos obligados a utilizar todos
> los medios a nuestro alcance para dejar en claro que nuestro reclamo
> principal es hacia el total fracaso de la clase gobernante, y de Calderón en
> particular, para asegurar condiciones básicas de paz y seguridad.

For Sunday's march to have a real impact and an expansive detonating effect,
all of us which participate in it are obliged to use all means at our disposal
to make it clear that our main complaint is about the total failure of the
political class, and Calderon in particular, to ensure basic conditions of
peace and security.

[![](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2011/05/289768032-194x300.jpg)](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2011/05/05/mexico-
prepares-for-massive-national-protest-on-may-8/attachment/289768032/)

Poster for the protest in Monterrey by @MariaMaria__

[Subcomandante Marcos sent a
letter](http://narconews.com/Issue67/article4400.html) to Javier Sicilia to
express solidarity and inform that the indigenous people of Chiapas will join
the national protest.

Citizens from Jalisco [already published their 6
demands](http://porunmexicosinviolencia.blogspot.com/2011/05/por-el-mexico-
que-queremos-suma-tu-voz.html) [es] for next Sunday, which include creating an
official database of victims of the war, stopping the mainstream media's
practice of presenting detainees under presumption of guilt and providing
human rights education for kids.

31 cites in Mexico, in nearly all states, have already scheduled protests.
International cities like Berlin, London, Hamburg, Río de Janeiro, New York,
Montreal and Barcelona are also participating. The protests scheduled for May
8 around the world can be tracked through [Google
maps](http://maps.google.es/maps/ms?ie=UTF8&t=h&oe=UTF8&msa=0&msid=214171538040246706002.0004a1f3ae2662bf4ba27).

[![](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2011/05/protests.jpg)](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2011/05/05/mexico-
prepares-for-massive-national-protest-on-may-8/protests-2/)

In Paris participants[ will create a
memorial](https://treintaycincomil.wordpress.com/2011/04/29/marchanacional-8mayo-
paris-trocadero-17h/) [es] and hand out flyers explaining the situation in
México. There is also an initiative called “Letters for Peace,” where
participants are asked to recover the name of a victim of the war from a
database and [send an empty envelope with their names
written](http://nuestraaparenterendicion.blogspot.com/2011/04/8-de-mayo-
cartas-de-paz-por-mexico.html ) [es] on it to President Felipe Calderón. A
gallery of the envelopes is [available on
Flickr.](http://www.flickr.com/photos/accionsobrevacio/)

[![](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2011/05/sobrevacio-375x281.jpg)](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2011/05/05/mexico-
prepares-for-massive-national-protest-on-may-8/sobrevacio/)

Image by acción.sobre.vacío on Flickr (CC BY 3.0)

Oscar Mondragón
[(@Omondra)](https://twitter.com/#!/omondra/status/65093330685538304) calls on
those that are not able to attend the protests to put a white flag outside
their house or car and wear white clothes in solidarity with the national
protest.

You can join the this massive protest from your city on May 8 and keep an eye
on the hashtags
#[marchanacional](http://search.twitter.com/search?q=marchanacional),
#[mayo8](http://search.twitter.com/search?q=mayo8),
#[8mayo](http://search.twitter.com/search?q=8mayo),
#[estamoshastalamadre](http://search.twitter.com/search?q=estamoshastalamadre),
and #[nomassangre](http://search.twitter.com/search?q=nomassangre), for
updates on this movement that many hope will mark the beginning of something
good.

