**_This post is part of our special coverage[Côte d'Ivoire Unrest
2011](../specialcoverage/cote-divoire-unrest-2011/)._**

After the [arrest](../2011/04/12/cote-divoire-laurent-gbagbos-fall/) in the
city of Abidjan on April 11, 2011, of Laurent Gbagbo, former president of Cote
d'Ivoire, and his wife Simone, some confusion remains regarding the process
that led to his capture.

Website [Abidjan.net](http://news.abidjan.net/) [fr] has published a [series
of videos](http://news.abidjan.net/v/6617.html) [fr] entitled, “The film of
Laurent Gbagbo's arrest: New elements” (”Le Film de l'arrestation de Laurent
Gbagbo: De nouveaux Éléments”), divided into four videos of 10-14 minutes
each. The videos show the sequence of events of the Gbagbos’ arrest, from the
bombing of their residence by French Special Forces, to the transfer of the
Gbagbo family to the Hotel du Golf.

**New elements**

The [first
video](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=lqPVK9jNthI&feature=player_embedded#at=681)
[fr] of the series shows what happened in the room just after the capture of
the Gbagbos. Simone Gbagbo, the former first lady, even says a few words to
the camera; on the armed soldiers and Liberian mercenaries who were still
fighting in Abidjan at the time, she says:

> Les tirs ce n'est pas bon.

Gun shots are not a good thing.

She is asked to speak louder, but replies:

> I cannot, I am out of breath.

The couple seem to be quite well treated, and Simone is even called “Maman”
(Mother), a mark of respect in most African societies. This confirms that
instructions given by Alassane Ouattara, now official president of the
Republic of Côte d'Ivoire, were respected.

In the last video, one of the Ivorian militaries who took part in the arrest
of the former President explains what happened in the “bunker”:

> Désiré Tagro a appelé pour dire qu'il va sortir avec un drapeau blanc, (…)
> de ne pas tirer. (…) On a arrêté de tirer, et ils sont tous sortis en rang
> comme des rats. Gbagbo en tête dans un gilet pare-balle français. Nous avons
> pris Gbagbo seul, on l'a mis dans la voiture du Gal Wattao, direction le
> Golf

Désire Tagro (one of Gbagbo's former ministers, who
[died](http://www.rfi.fr/contenu/desire-tagro-proche-laurent-gbagbo-mort-
suites-blessures-balles) [fr] shortly after these events) called to say that
he was going to come out waving a white flag, […] asking us not to shoot. […]
We then stopped shooting, and they all came out in a line like rats. Gbagbo
was at the head of the queue, wearing a French bulletproof vest. We took
Gbagbo alone, we put him in a car with General Wattao, in the direction of the
[Hotel du] Golf.

The same video also shows family members, who were arrested with the
presidential couple, gathered in another room of the hotel:

**Alleged Gbagbo interview**

Following his arrest, Laurent Gbagbo was [transferred
](http://www.europe1.fr/International/Laurent-Gbagbo-est-a-Korhogo-E1-498569/)
[fr] to Korhogo, in the north of the Côte d'Ivoire, where he is now living
under house arrest. He still has some support, especially among the Ivorian,
and African
[diaspora](https://www.facebook.com/media/set/fbx/?set=a.128312840578084.31201.119142914828410)
[fr].

News even spread about an [alleged
interview](http://nouvelles.abidjantv.net/actualite-2555-exclusif-gbagbo-
parle-depuis-la-prison-premiere-interview-de-laurent-gbagbo-depuis-son-
incarceration-a-korhogo.html?) [fr] that Laurent Gbagbo secretly gave to a
journalist in Geneva.The journalist in question has explained that he received
a text message from the former president, who used a mobile phone one of his
jailers had forgotten.

Ivorian netizens reacted to news of the alleged interview with irony.
Yopougon10, who comments under a [blog
post](http://unebourriche.blogs.nouvelobs.com/archive/2011/05/01/gbagbo-en-
captivite-interviewe-par-telephone.html) [fr] about this interview says:

> mdr !!! Gbagbo a certainement autant gagné ces élections qu'il a réalisé
> cette interview !!

LOL!!! Gbagbo probably won the elections as much as he gave this interview!!

According to
@[Woizo_SP](http://twitter.com/#%21/woizo_SP/status/64444002195353602) on
social network Twitter:

> Lol le sms de gbagbo pour interview: “c'est Laurent Gbagbo. Appelez-moi si
> vous pouvez, c'est pas une blague” mdrr ça sent le faux

Lol, Gbagbo's SMS for the interview: “It's Laurent Gbagbo, call me if you can,
this is not a joke” Lol, it seems like a fake

The authentification of the interview hasn't been confirmed, and according to
specialists, it is almost sure that the interview never took place.

**A well treated former president**

On Monday May 2, 2011, Laurent Gbagbo received a visit from three members of
“[The Elders](http://www.theelders.org/)” group: Koffi Anan, Desmond Tutu and
Mary Robinson. He said he wants the country to “return to normal”.

John James, _BBC_ correspondent in Côte d'Ivoire posted a few pictures of the
visit on his
[Facebook](https://www.facebook.com/media/set/fbx/?set=a.856335819359.2439368.36812894&l=479048494e)
profile.

[![Lauren Gbagbo and Koffi Anan in Korhogo, Côte d'Ivoire. Image by John
James, posted on Facebook.](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2011/05/Lauren-Gbagbo-and-Koffi-
Anan-375x2801.jpg)](http://www.facebook.com/photo.php?fbid=856336702589&set=a.856335819359.2439368.36812894&type=1&l=479048494e&theater)

Lauren Gbagbo and Koffi Anan in Korhogo, Côte d'Ivoire. Image by John James,
posted on Facebook.

The preliminary hearing of Laurent Gbagbo is
[scheduled](http://news.abidjan.net/h/397981.html) [fr] to happen on May 4,
2011, but according to journalist Théophile Kouamouo on his
[blog](http://kouamouo.ivoire-blog.com/archive/2011/05/03/confidences-sur-l-
entretien-entre-gbagbo-tutu-et-les-elders.html) [fr], the date has been
postponed to May 6.

**_This post is part of our special coverage[Côte d'Ivoire Unrest
2011](../specialcoverage/cote-divoire-unrest-2011/)._**

