_**This post is part of our special coverage[The Death of Osama Bin
Laden](https://globalvoicesonline.org/specialcoverage/the-death-of-osama-bin-
laden/).**_

Several Iranian bloggers have reacted to the [death of Osama Bin
Laden](http://www.csmonitor.com/World/Middle-East/2011/0502/For-many-Arabs-
Osama-Bin-Laden-had-already-lost-his-appeal). Some with serious remarks, a few
with questions and some with irony.

Iranian blogger _Machin Hesab_
[asks](http://abacusir.blogspot.com/2011/05/blog-post_02.html) [fa] why they
shot him in the head.

_Mohmmad Moini_ [writes](http://mmoeeni14.blogspot.com/2011/05/blog-
post_02.html) [fa] that Bin Laden symbolizes a thought, and that the death of
Osama does not mean his ideas are dead. An idea that does not like human
beings, and uses religion as an instrument. For Bin Laden only his own reading
(interpretation) of religion was legitimate, but he should have doubted his
ideas before getting killed.

[![Several bloggers such as Azarkhan published Osama's photo \(above\) with
his family in Sweden in 1971, showing a different, younger Osama \(circled in
red\).](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2011/05/Ben-375x281.jpg)](http://azarakan.blogspot.com/2011/05/blog-
post.html)

Several bloggers such as Azarkhan published Osama's photo (above) with his
family in Sweden in 1971, showing a different, younger Osama (circled in red).

A user of[ Balatarin](http://balatarin.com/topic/2011/5/2/1007563/popular/5),
a popular Iranian link sharing site,
[published](http://i51.tinypic.com/314p2s9.jpg) a [fake] photo and said as a
joke, “Now the municipality in Tehran will rename Ladan street to Martyr Bin
Ladan.”

[![Ladan street, Tehran,
Iran.](http://i51.tinypic.com/314p2s9.jpg)](http://i51.tinypic.com/314p2s9.jpg)

Ladan street, Tehran, Iran.

_Floret_ , another Balatarin user,
[writes](http://balatarin.com/permlink/2011/5/2/2488186) [fa] that it is time
for Iranian people to celebrate Osama's death in the streets of Iran.

_Uniirani_ [writes](http://unirani.blogspot.com/2011/05/blog-post.html) [fa]
that now that Bin Laden has died the world has one less evil person in it. He
calls him a “real terrorist”.

_**This post is part of our special coverage[The Death of Osama Bin
Laden](https://globalvoicesonline.org/specialcoverage/the-death-of-osama-bin-
laden/).**_

