[![](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2011/04/imagineNATIVE1.jpg)](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2011/04/imagineNATIVE1.jpg)Indigenous teens in four different
Canadian communities share their hopes, stories and dreams in a series of
short videos in “My Space. My Story” where they speak about things that matter
to them as indigenous youth. The workshop was organized by the imagineNATIVE
Film + Media Arts Festival, a yearly international festival in Toronto, Canada
where Indigenous people show the different artistic ways they create art
reflecting the diversity of Indigenous nations in the world.

One of the ten teens will win an opportunity to travel to and have their short
screened at the imagineNATIVE festival. The winner will be selected by [online
votes on the website](http://www.imaginenative.org/newsdetails.php?id=160)
before May 1st.

Keelan Keeshig of Cape Croker is a senior in the Parry Sound High School and
[in his video](http://youtu.be/KxWdW73m9fw) he shares how he dealt with
bullying growing up: in his case, it was due to his long hair, a mark of his
traditional culture which he didn't know how to explain to his short-haired
peers.

[Laura Gagnon](http://youtu.be/FeaqmLO-zJQ) is Ojibway and her bright future
seemed to be full of promise, but bad choices led her to drug addiction and
alcoholism. It was through rediscovering her spiritual and cultural roots that
she was able to come clean and now she is back in high school, and hopes to go
on to college and become an addictions counselor to help others.

Sequin D. Williams of Fort Albany First Nation
[explains](http://youtu.be/yG7qL3PZzvc) how when he goes hunting for geese
with his father he is repeating a pattern: his father was taught to hunt by
his father in turn, so for Sequin, hunting is how he connects to his ancestors
and indigenous tradition.

You can see the other 7 videos on the imagineNATIVE site, and [vote for your
favorite one](http://www.imaginenative.org/newsdetails.php?id=160): the winner
will have the chance to show his short film to other artists and actors in the
Indigenous art community at the [Toronto Film And Media Arts
festival](http://www.imaginenative.org/index.php?y=99).

