_**This post is part of our special coverage[Yemen Protests
2011](https://globalvoicesonline.org/specialcoverage/yemen-protests-2011/).**_

Hundreds of protesters took to the streets of Taiz, Yemen, today, calling for
the overthrow of the Ali Abdullah Saleh regime. According to _[Yemen
Post](http://yemenpost.net/Detail123456789.aspx?ID=3&SubID=3493)_ , one
protester was killed and four were injured by live bullets when republican
guard forces attacked the protesters.

Despite the rain, women, children, and men, were seen carrying their umbrellas
and waving their flags as they marched through the streets of Taiz.

_multisal999_ posts a [video
here](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=1l3BmI_fAIA) showing a scene from the
protest:

Soon, footage of protesters being gunned down, appears on _YouTube_.

**WARNING: GRAPHIC VIDEOS**

_Ramzi2011100_
[posts](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=tPGAZCcZc6g&feature=player_embedded)
fleeting images of protesters carrying a protesters wounded in the head in
this video. The video uploaded today comes with the following explanation:

سقوط جرحئ في تعز برصاص الامن الحي ال\ي استخدم امام مدرسة الشعب

Casualties in Taiz from live ammunition used by security forces in front of
the Shaab School

This [video](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Jvj3oYvaJM4) by _mufeed2022_
shows another person with a head wound being carried away, after being shot by
the security forces. The video is entitled (Ar):

قوات امن على صالح تقتل احد المتظاهرين وتجرح اخرين تعز

“Ali Saleh's forces kill one protester and injure others in Taiz.”

The description which comes with the video reads:

اليوم في تعز بالقرب من مدرسة الشعب بدء الجيش باطلاق النار على المتظاهرين وقتل
احد المتظاهرين وذلك بعد خروج المتظاهرين ورفضهم لموافقة المعارضه على المبادره
الخليجية .  
المتظاهرين دائما كانو يعتقدون بان الجيش في حمايتهم ضد التعسف الامني من قبل
قوات الامن المركزي والحرس الجمهوري التي اتضح انها اكذوبه

Today in Taiz, near by the Shaab school, the army started shooting protesters,
killing one of them, after the demonstrators took to the streets in protest
against the opposition accepting the Gulf Cooperative Council's initiative.
The protesters have always thought that the army was protecting them from
police brutality, and the violence of the security forces and the republic
guard, but this turns out to be a lie.

_**This post is part of our special coverage[Yemen Protests
2011](https://globalvoicesonline.org/specialcoverage/yemen-protests-2011/).**_

