Citizen video's power to promote change has been proven in Raipur, India. A
screening of a video showing the hardships faced by the gay community enabled
audience members from diverse backgrounds to relate to the discrimination and
show their support by organizing a peaceful demonstration.

[![India Unheard logo](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2011/04/indiaunheard-100x100.jpg)](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2011/04/indiaunheard.jpg)

India Unheard logo

[Video Volunteer](http://www.videovolunteers.org/programmes/indiaunheard) and
[India Unheard](http://indiaunheard.videovolunteers.org/sarwat/indiaunheard-
encourages-the-gay-community-to-organize/) citizen journalist Sarwat Naqvi
screened in Raipur his video on the search for identity in the gay community
of Chhattisgarh. [The video](http://youtu.be/hyrPBCPNMl4) showed how
discrimination, sexual abuse and lack of identity are only some of the
problems faced by homosexual and eunuchs, who some consider to be [India's
‘third gender](http://www.thingsasian.com/stories-photos/2022)‘.

[Sarwat](http://indiaunheard.videovolunteers.org/sarwat/indiaunheard-
encourages-the-gay-community-to-organize/) organized the screening with local
women's union Samata Mayla Mandal, and in total about 45 people showed up,
including homosexual and transgender audience members as well as locals who
just wanted to be informed.

The results were positive: community members learned about issues affecting
this traditionally invisible group and were moved to act, and homosexuals who
watched the video were empowered to become part of the efforts to advocate for
their rights and work on a more inclusive community.

[IndiaUnheard](http://www.videovolunteers.org/programmes/indiaunheard) is a
community news service initiative of video volunteers whereby a network of
community correspondents are trained to tell the stories about their own
communities which are usually not told by other media.

[![Community correspondent for India Unheard. Image by Flickr user Video
Volunteers\(VV\) \(CC BY-SA 2.0\).](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2011/04/5546038499_9168b29153.jpg)](http://www.flickr.com/photos/videovolunteers/5546038499/in/photostream/)

Community correspondent for India Unheard. Image by Flickr user Video
Volunteers(VV) (CC BY-SA 2.0).

