_**This post is part of our special coverage[Forest Focus:
Amazon](https://globalvoicesonline.org/specialcoverage/forest-focus-amazon/)
and [Global Development
2011](https://globalvoicesonline.org/specialcoverage/un-millennium-
development-goals-in-2011/).**_

The [Monteverde Now](http://monteverdenow.org) project documents the stories
of 11 members of the Monteverde Community through short video interviews where
they explain how their life has been transformed and how they are adapting to
sustaining their diverse and delicate ecosystem in the face of climate change.

[![The key players of Monteverde Now.](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2011/04/mvn-together-
cropped-375x281.jpg)](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2011/04/mvn-together-cropped.jpg)+

The key players of Monteverde Now.

Monteverde in Costa Rica is located in the mountains in the Northwestern part
of Costa Rica and is best known for the Cloud Forest Preserve that shares the
same name. Monteverde means green mountain and it is the name the Quaker
settlers who founded the community gave the region almost 60 years ago. The
Preserve is the result of the community's effort to save the water sheds and
conserve the wildlife distinct to this biological zone.

[Lucky and Wolf Guindon](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=R-dfFs8okqY) are a
couple who were part of the pioneer group of Quakers who back in 1951 decided
to make this mountain their home, and they tell about the early days and how
this evolution into tourism is not something they expected or even encouraged:

Although the region was originally dedicated to dairy farming and the
production of cheese, nowadays it is tourism which runs the community's
economy as people travel to see species such as the resplendent quetzal, the
three wattled bellbird as well as other animals and plants particular to the
cold and wet climate atop the mist shrouded mountain range. One of the
interviews focuses on [Maria
Saenz](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=dp_VDjw5Gkw), a nature guide in the area
as she explains how climate change is now affecting the type and number of
animals found in the area as animals from the lower regions head up the
mountain seeking cooler weather as the coastal areas heat up: but where will
the animals of the cloud forest, already as high as they can get, go?

Change didn't come easily, people had to change their traditions and ideas
about the role of nature in their lives. [Eladio
Cruz](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=4zF6UyImhJc), who was born and raised in
the area and is now part of the conservation efforts and member of
organizations protecting the Cloud Forest, confesses that he doesn't seem to
be doing enough in conservation to pay back all the damage he used to do
before he learned about conservation and decided to join the efforts to
protect the area. In his own words: “Without a doubt, I was a great destroyer
of nature.”.

Fortunately, people are increasingly making positive changes regarding the
environment. [Carlos Nyreen](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=nsHCx5SX7Vw) tells
of how some school kids decided to turn some of the waste generated by the
heavy tourism industry and turn it into energy. In Monteverde, garbage has to
be trucked off the mountain and its high cost was pushing people to dispose of
waste, such as used cooking oil, in harmful ways in an attempt to cut corners.
Now, instead of being dumped into the ground, the kids’ school project is
turning cooking oil the restaurants and hotels send them into bio diesel which
is used to power the school buses that take them to and from the school.

Other people interviewed for this project who speak about the changes that
have slowly transformed Monteverde are: a [dairy
farmer](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=p0VblK2PvJE), [a
biologist](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=3o9dqkd19aw), a [tour
operator](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=aSOFXbMT5FI),[ a
cowboy](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=x4MhtYbcZzQ), [an
educator](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=dA9Cf5falko), [a researcher
](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=3npPhFNUdlM)and a [coffee
grower](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Ch0TjgmJQ-I).

[Monteverde Now](http://monteverdenow.org/partners/) is a Master's Project
thesis of the [The United Nations Mandated University for
Peac](http://www.upeace.org/)e located in Costa Rica and [The Monteverde
Institute](http://www.mvinstitute.org/). On [their site
](http://monteverdenow.org/about/overview/)you can read more about the project
and how to[ take action](http://monteverdenow.org/take-action/) to protect the
Cloud Forest and it is available (as are [the
videos](http://www.youtube.com/user/monteverdenow)) in [
Spanish](http://monteverdeya.org/) as well.

_**This post is part of our special coverage[Forest Focus:
Amazon](https://globalvoicesonline.org/specialcoverage/forest-focus-amazon/)
and [Global Development
2011](https://globalvoicesonline.org/specialcoverage/un-millennium-
development-goals-in-2011/).**_

