Since I [last posted](../2011/01/29/cyber-%E2%80%9Clong-
war%E2%80%9D-continues-in-iran/), events on the ground and online in Iran have
continued to escalate. This is broadly in line with my belief that the Iranian
government has decided to engage in a long-term project to silence dissent
online, using both state and non-state actors, as well as to become at a
minimum a “regional cyberpower”. [Recent
statements](http://www.krsi.net/news/detail.asp?NewsID=8093) and actions by
the regime confirm my belief, as I'll discuss in this post.

The regime's level of paranoia has increased as the 2010-2011 protests across
the Middle East have spread – the protests demonstrated that power gained from
fear can swiftly vanish once the fear is gone. Paradoxically, the regime has
even [supported the protests](http://www.presstv.ir/detail/163526.html)
claiming that it is simply an extension of the 1979 Iranian Revolution.
Capitalizing on the regime's endorsement of the protests, Green Movement
leaders MirHossein Mousavi and Mehdi Karroubi [called
for](http://www.rferl.org/content/day_of_rage_blog/2299873.html) a rally in
solidarity with the brave protesters in Egypt and Tunisia. Their call was
brilliant: if the regime was enthusiastic about protests abroad, it should be
overjoyed by solidarity protests at home. Given the lack of an independent
media their call was spread online, protests organized on social networks and
opposition websites and strategies devised through distant collaboration made
possible by electronic communications. The importance of the Internet to the
Green Movement was demonstrated with these protests.

Almost immediately digital activists inside and outside Iran sprung into
action, activating dormant networks and connecting with new ones. [Facebook
pages](https://www.facebook.com/25bahman) dedicated to rallying supporters
appeared and Green Movement websites carried banners and links to key
information about the protests. Scores of new videos and posters were created
as well as small images that could be printed out and easily distributed.
Small images that could be sent via SMS or bluetooth were created and shared
online as well, allowing for “bluetooth protest spam” to occur in crowded
subways and on buses.

[![](https://advocacy.globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2011/03/25bahmanqqq-212x300.jpg)](https://advocacy.globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2011/03/25bahmanqqq.jpg)

25 Bahman Poster

[![](https://advocacy.globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2011/03/25bahmanSMS.jpg)](https://advocacy.globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2011/03/25bahmanSMS.jpg)

25 Bahman protest call deliberately designed to be spread via bluetooth and
SMS.

Enterprising activists in the Iranian diaspora [created their own
phonebanks](http://irantheparadox.blogs.france24.com/article/2011/02/14/calling-
tehran-skype-iranian-diasporas-initiative-0) to call Iranians and notify them
of the protests. From February 7th to February 14th Tor usage doubled from
3,000 to more than 6,000 as part of a concerted push by more technologically
savvy digital activists to inform Iranians about security and anonymity.

[![](https://advocacy.globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2011/03/torusers-375x234.png)](https://advocacy.globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2011/03/torusers.png)

Tor Users in Iran Feb. 7-14th

Images of graffiti, a popular way for the Green Movement to effectively double
the impact of a message by spreading it offline in the streets and online via
photos again appeared calling people to the streets.

[![](https://advocacy.globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2011/03/25bahmangraffitti-375x281.jpg)](https://advocacy.globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2011/03/25bahmangraffitti.jpg)

Graffiti for the 25 Bahman protests.

Digital activists worked day and night at a pace unseen since 2009 in
preparation for the first protests in almost one year. What was remarkable was
the level of real and digital solidarity expressed with an outpouring of
creativity where the movement generates new symbols and meanings online for
use in future protests and as an expression of their legitimate demands. The
protests were met with bullets and batons, and the protesters were armed with
their incredible courage and their cell phone cameras. Hundreds of
[videos](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=HhV1vJCVsEM) and photos emerged
showing protesters chanting and marching.

Illustrating the regime's realization that protesters are Internet savvy
launched near simultaneous DDoS attacks on Green Movement websites as well as
popular Iranian link sharing site Balatarin, whose DDoS attacks resulted in a
downtime of nearly 24 hours. Although these attacks have come to be expected,
typically beginning 72 hours before a protest date, these attacks were the
largest seen since the presidential elections of 2009 and began five days
before the protests as opposed to three.

[![](https://advocacy.globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2011/03/balatarin_ddos_15feb-375x187.png)](https://advocacy.globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2011/03/balatarin_ddos_15feb.png)

Balatarin DDoS on 25 Bahman protests. From blog.balatarin.com

Iran is a much more internationally isolated country than either Egypt or
Tunisia was, and the regime knows it. People from around the world could watch
the crowds at Tahrir Square in Cairo on Al Jazeera live, but similar news
coverage is unavailable for Iran. The only way most of the world's media would
get the news, images and videos that translate into clicks and awareness would
be through opposition websites and blogs that have become the defacto
independent media in Iran. By attacking these important sites, seizing several
domains associated with the Green Movement since February 14, and blocking
specific types of VPNs since February 7th, the regime could act like the Green
graffiti artists and double their own impact: by bringing down opposition
sites they not only send a political message to the opposition that you are
still vulnerable online – but also slow or completely stop the flow of
information to the outside world at a moment when Iran was trying to look like
a supporter of the oppressed rather than an oppressor itself.

After the protests were over, the opposition leaders went
[missing](http://www.nytimes.com/2011/02/18/world/middleeast/18iran.html?_r=2&hp)
and new protests were called to support the imprisoned leadership. Yet again
[Facebook pages](https://www.facebook.com/10Esfand) were created to support
the new protests and the movement's leadership in exile established a Facebook
page, [The Green Path of Hope](https://www.facebook.com/Greenpathofhope), to
provide news and updates which also were to appear on Green Movement websites
while Mousavi and Karroubi are missing. What's emerging is an interplay
between Facebook and independent Green Movement websites who work in concert
and separately to spread awareness and information. This is a crucial point
since it means the Green Movement need not only rely on commercial space
(Facebook) as its sole means of communicating with the outside world but that
independent websites and news organizations not hosted at commercial entities
(WordPress, Blogspot, Facebook) continue to play a vital role in the spreading
of awareness for the opposition online. Facebook and Twitter, despite what the
media and Internet cheerleaders may say, are only one part of a broader
oppositional Internet strategy.

As seems to be the case whenever people speak their minds in countries where
those in power are scared of the minds of others, more brave young people were
killed by the regime's thugs, in this case their names were [Sane
Jaleh](https://www.facebook.com/SaneJale) and [Mohammad
Mokhtari](https://www.facebook.com/Mokhatari). Powerfully, Mohammad's last
words on Facebook, just before the February 14th protests were:

> God, give me death by standing for it's better than a life of sitting under
> oppression.

On the Internet it can be difficult to be forgotten. Every utterance and every
awkward photograph may be stored somewhere permanently. Google searches can
reveal the mistakes of youth years after the deed was done. On the other hand
incredible moments of heroism and bravery, those courageous comments that go
unnoticed in the sea of Charlie Sheen and Tiger Moms will also be remembered
long after our infatuations have faded. Although we may never know Mr.
Mokhtari's actual last words, his last Facebook post stands in defiance of
everything the regime is and reminds us of the power of the Internet not only
as something that can play a part in a new future, but also as a way to ground
ourselves with memories of past bravery.

Embarrassed by the murder of Neda in 2009 the regime took advantage of Mr.
Jaleh's death and declared that he was a member of its thug-like milita, the
Basiji. [Friends of Mr.
Jaleh](http://www.iranhumanrights.org/2011/02/i-vehemently-deny-his-being-a-
basiji-says-sane-jalehs-close-friend/) and [Facebook
pages](https://www.facebook.com/SaneJale) stood up to denounce this blatant
attempt to spin the media story just hours after this young man's death.
Digital activists contacted the Western media as well as made blog posts,
posters, and videos of Mr. Jaleh's life to demonstrate clearly that he was not
a member or supporter of the regime. Yet again, in the absence of any balanced
media coverage, the Internet becomes the space of contestation, but in this
case it is over the facts of a human life. In this case the space provided by
opposition websites that had successfully survived the attacks by the regime
became a place of dignity, a place where the facts of Mr. Jaleh's life could
be told and explained and understood far from the hyperbole of men terrified
that others have their own minds and opinions. The ability of opposition
websites to perform this duty established them as digital spaces of solace and
remembrance that stood silently and resolutely, armed only with the truth of
Mr. Jaleh's life.

The regime also (again) began sending out masses of phishing emails to members
of the opposition and to opposition websites. This is not a new tactic, as
[I've discussed previously](../2011/01/29/cyber-%E2%80%9Clong-
war%E2%80%9D-continues-in-iran/) but was renewed with significant vigor in
concert with the larger DDoS attacks. These are targeted to specific activists
and websites, often done in concert with arrests of key individuals who are
then tortured to supply email addresses and contact information for other
activists. There seems to be emerging a standard playbook of sorts that the
regime is using for going after the opposition online in a concerted way.
There are highs and lows in their repression cycle with different techniques
used to sustain pressure but allow activists to take more risks before
clamping down again. At the same time the Iranian Cyber Army re-emerged from
its slumber to [deface the Voice of
America](http://blogs.voanews.com/breaking-news/2011/02/22/iranian-group-says-
it-hacked-voa-web-site/) and replace its front page with a message directed at
Hillary Clinton:

[![](https://advocacy.globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2011/03/voahacked-375x249.jpg)](https://advocacy.globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2011/03/voahacked.jpg)

Image of the Voice of America after being hacked by the Iranian Cyber Army

The focus on Mrs. Clinton is interesting and comes soon after another speech
by her on [Internet freedom](http://www.csmonitor.com/USA/Foreign-
Policy/2011/0215/Hillary-Clinton-champions-Internet-freedom-but-cautions-on-
WikiLeaks). It most likely represents one arm of a response to the United
States for its perceived meddling in Iran's internal affairs via the idea of
Internet Freedom and the heavily covered
[Stuxnet](http://www.vanityfair.com/culture/features/2011/04/stuxnet-201104)
incident. However, this would not be Iran's only response to the United States
and other countries who sought to violate the Islamic Republic's digital
borders.

Recently, [fraudulent certificates](http://www.eweekeurope.co.uk/news/comodo-
web-certificates-heist-linked-to-iranian-isp-24712) for popular websites
(Google, Skype, Yahoo, etc.) were obtained from a Comodo partner by an
attacker believed to be associated with the Iranian regime. This attack was
significant in that it would have allowed the attacker to perform man-in-the-
middle attacks as well as impersonate these websites. This is an important
attack that went after a major certificate authority and has highlighted the
relative fragility of the certificate authority system.

The attacker has posted various comments and explanations for his actions
[here](http://pastebin.com/u/ComodoHacker) as well an apparent interview with
[Errata Security](http://erratasec.blogspot.com/2011/03/interview-with-
comodohacker.html) which contains more information. This is not a technical
blog and so I will not go into technical details, but rather focus on the
bigger picture and understanding how this fits in with the current situation
in Iran. There are well-reasoned doubts as to the nationality of this attacker
and whether or not he/she is actually Iranian based on speech patterns and
choice of words. Naturally, there are also persistent doubts that it is a
state-sponsored action. These points, while important, obscure the fact that
the person who claims to be the attacker professes to act in the interest of
the Islamic Republic of Iran's ruling hierarchy and thus we should use that as
our basis for understanding their actions.

With the Stuxnet incident and now Comodo's certificates compromised, the
ongoing cyber conflict between the regime and its real/imagined foes has
entered a new phase. The reason for this is not necessarily only the
sophistication of the Comodo attack, but also for its coverage. The Iranian
regime seeks out and desires attention from the world's leaders and from the
international media. These are often replayed back at home as a form of
international legitimacy showing that a government which positions itself as
the main adversary of the U.S. is truly a force to be reckoned with and one
with international power. Although the individuals at the highest level who
have employed the Comodo hacker likely did not understand the nature of the
attacks, the media coverage has made it abundantly clear that it was
significant. In fact, it seems to have drawn more of a media attention than
the deaths of Sane Jaleh and Mohammad Mokhtari as well as the crackdown on the
February 14th protests combined. The apparent success of this attack and its
media success will no doubt encourage more of this kind of behavior. Iran will
seek to impose its own paranoid fear of the Internet on the rest of the world
so as to amplify fear in digital activists at home and bolster legitimacy
amongst its supporters. In fact, it's already trying to [offer the world its
version of the Internet](http://www.presstv.ir/detail/167106.html).
Cyberconflict is cheap, effective, and poses very little risk to the regime.
It is precisely the sort of attention the regime wants so it can demonstrate
regional and global power and technological sophistication for a temporary
boost to its own feelings of insecurity.

Beyond this, “Internet Freedom” rhetoric by leaders in government, industry,
NGOs, and the press strongly politicizes the Internet. While we may think of
the Internet as a free and open space for exchange and debate, repeated
politicization of the Internet as a “tool of democracy” has the opposite
effect on paranoid regimes who view every act of ours with suspicion. Their
actions online become circumscribed, apparently surrounded by “enemies” like
[Facebook and
Twitter](http://www.rferl.org/content/Iran_Says_Facebook_And_Twitter_Are_Countrys_Hidden_Enemies/2171343.html),
[Google](http://citizenlab.org/2011/03/google-spends-1-million-on-censorship-
and-throttling-detection/), the State Department's Internet Freedom division,
etc. Their only option may be to somehow “level the playing field” in order to
ensure continued legitimacy at home and to maintain a level of perceived
international respect. Since they view our online actions as hostile and
motivated towards gain, the regime is more likely to likewise engage in
hostile online actions to forestall our gains and increase their security to
counter our perceived threat.

Political events at home and abroad, combined with actions taken by the
opposition and other states in cyberspace situate the regime within a
cyberpolitical (for lack of a better term) context which seems to strongly
influence actions the regime takes online when the two spheres (political and
digital) overlap. In this blog I have tried to emphasize the importance of
context in understanding the online political actions of the opposition and
regime. What's also important is to understand the context in which the state
as a political entity exists and operates. Tehran already views every action
by Washington with suspicion, and the Internet is just one component of that
view. Our politicization of the Internet via official statements and the media
as a political space where democratic ideals are realized (regardless if this
is true or not) opens it up to political actions from nations who believe they
have a reason to fear our intentions. Iranian digital activists know this from
first-hand experience, but the media, pundits, and NGOs tend to ignore it.
There is a treatment of events as isolated, disconnected from the context
under which they arose and into which they will fade. These attacks have
arisen not spontaneously, but out of a series of circumstances and when they
fade they will become the foundations of the next set of attacks. Iran's
recent actions online are inherently political acts that just happen take a
digital form, necessitating an understanding of the cyberpolitical contexts of
both activists and the state (internally and externally) in order to
understand motives, establish patterns, and anticipate future events.

