Young people in Kibera, Kenya, which is known to some as Africa's largest
slum, are determined to show a different face of the place where they live.
With video cameras in hand, they scout the streets for stories to [show the
world](http://kiberanewsnetwork.org) how Kibera sees itself.

The project started in April 2010, spearheaded by [Map
Kibera](http://mapkibera.org/) and [Kibera Community Development Agenda
(KCODA)](http://kcoda.org/). They began with just two young journalists and
now the team is up to 14 young people who record the videos, edit and upload
them to the web: not only to their own website [Kibera News
Network](http://kiberanewsnetwork.org/) but also to [Voice of
Kibera](http://www.voiceofkibera.org/), a site which maps their videos and
also other news sent in by people via SMS and other mediums.

[![Kibera News Network in Kenya](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2011/04/kiberanewsnetwork-100x100.jpg)](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2011/04/kiberanewsnetwork.jpg)

Kibera News Network in Kenya

Content is very varied: from job security issues, to reporting fires or train
accidents, as well as cultural events and political activity. This[ next
video](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=sETsQPPn3JI), for example, shows how two
young men have turned to a somewhat unusual, for Kibera, employment: they own
and work at a beauty salon, providing services such as manicures as well as
hairstyling:

In this [other video](http://youtu.be/ihDtjerA7tE) we visit Kevin Irungu, a
young man who earns a living from his art:

Both of the previous examples show how creativity and hard work pay off.
However, for others in Kibera making a living is a constant struggle as
demonstrated by these
[washerwomen](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=-7_BAAQAFc8) who work hard and
sometimes don't even get paid:

In Kibera, [health is an important
issue](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=l8WiHhFAHgU): open sewage trenches and
high population density means that communicable diseases can quickly spread.
Added to the fact that many people don't have the economic resources to buy
medication a disease can easily turn into an epidemic:

You can see more of the videos in the[ Kibera News Network
](http://kiberanewsnetwork.org/)site or on their [YouTube
channel](http://www.youtube.com/user/KiberaNewsNetwork).

