_**This post is part of our special coverage[Egypt Revolution
2011](https://globalvoicesonline.org/specialcoverage/egypt-protests-2011/).**_

Just a few months ago, many Egyptians might have wished to see the country's
then-President Mubarak in jail, yet almost certainly none of them imagined
this wish might come true one day.

However, on Wednesday April 13, 2011, Egyptians woke up to the news of
Mubarak's detention first thing in the morning. Here is how the moment was
documented in the Egyptian social media scene.

**Celebrating a dictator's detention**

The Egyptian writer Ibrahim Farghali [compared the
moment](http://ifarghali.blogspot.com/2011/04/13.html) [ar] to that of the
first man in space:

احتفلت روسيا امس بذكرى خروج اول رائد فضاء روسي للفضاء الخارجي يوري جاجارين،
واليوم تحتفل مصر بسجن الرئيس المخلوع حسني مبارك  
…  
نتمنى أن نرى مصر قريبا تحتفل بإنجازات شبيهة بمنجزات دول العالم المتقدم  
والثورة لا تزال في الشارع

Yesterday, Russia celebrated the anniversary of the first time a human being
went into outer space, [Yuri
Gagarin](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Yuri_Gagarin). And today Egypt
celebrates its former president Hosni Mubarak's journey to prison.

We hope that one day Egypt celebrates similar achievements like those of the
first world, and we hope then that the revolutionary spirit continues to exist
in the streets.

Zeinobia also wrote a new blog post about the moment, simply titled, “[A
Historical Moment](http://egyptianchronicles.blogspot.com/2011/04/historical-
moment.html)“. She then elaborated how the president's sons were also
detained:

Former ousted president Mohamed Hosni Mubarak and his son Alaa and Gamal El-
Din are detained for 15 days in jail.

Zeinobia then continued to explain that Mubarak is facing charges of murdering
protesters and stealing public money; however, till now Mubarak is staying in
a hospital for health reasons. Alaa and Gamal Mubarak are facing the same
charges as their father.

**Reactions of the people**

Brazilian cartoonist [Carlos Latuff](http://twitpic.com/photos/CarlosLatuff)
documented the moment by his own way, with a
[series](http://twitpic.com/4krzhq) [of cartoon](http://twitpic.com/4kicsp)
[drawings](http://twitpic.com/4ki1uu).

[![Mubarak Before and After Jan25
Revolution](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2011/04/Mubarak_BeforeAndAfter-319x300.gif)](http://twitpic.com/4kicsp)

Mubarak Before and After Jan25 Revolution, illustration by Carlos Latuff

The majority of Egyptian status updates on Twitter over the past couple of
days have also been about Mubarak's detention as well.

@[engmtm](http://twitter.com/#!/engmtm/statuses/58585342827167744): I wish I
could interrogate #Mubarak myself :D

Mubarak's [voice recorded message](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=3MFfhRKJyfU)
[ar], which he sent to [_Al-Arabiya_ news channel](http://www.alarabiya.net/)
and which [turned out to have been
written](http://egyptianchronicles.blogspot.com/2011/04/follow-up-mubaraks-on-
trial.html) by the Egyptian well known lawyer Fareed El-Deeb, is believed to
be the last nail in Mubarak's coffin:

@[Eslam_Foad](http://twitter.com/#!/Eslam_Foad/statuses/58555520419770368):
شكرا للراجل اللي بيكتب خطابات مبارك من غيرك الثورة ماكنتش هتنجح

@[Eslam_Foad](http://twitter.com/#!/Eslam_Foad/statuses/58555520419770368):
Thanks to the guy who writes Mubarak's speeches, without you the revolution
wouldn't have succeeded.

In the past weeks, Torah Prison became not only host for Mubarak's sons, but
it has also been hosting many of the pillars of Mubarak's regime. People on
Twitter did not miss the chance to mock this fact:

@[MAkhnoukh](http://twitter.com/#!/MAkhnoukh/statuses/58637139746889728): عاجل
تم تغيير سجن طرة لدولة طرة ويطالب سكانها بالاستقلال فهى دولة متكاملة لها رئيس
وحكومة ومش عايزين شعب خالص

@[MAkhnoukh](http://twitter.com/#!/MAkhnoukh/statuses/58637139746889728):
Breaking News: Torah Jail is now called Torah Republic and it's citizens
demand their independence. It's got it's own president, government, and they
do not need people there.

@[Aessameldin](http://twitter.com/#!/Aessameldin/status/58198068813774848):
جمال هيمثل فى السيزون الجديد من بريزون بريك و خديجة فى ديسبيريت هاوس وايفز

@[Aessameldin](http://twitter.com/#!/Aessameldin/status/58198068813774848):
Gamal Mubarak will star in Prison Break's new season, and his wife Khadija
will join Desperate House Wives crew.

Various fake Twitter accounts of [Mubarak](http://twitter.com/#!/EgyptState),
his family ([Suzanne Mubarak](http://twitter.com/Suzi_Sabet), [Alaa
Mubarak](http://twitter.com/#!/ALAAMUBARA), [Gamal
Mubarak](http://twitter.com/#!/gamal_moubarak) and his wife
[Khadija](http://twitter.com/#!/Deega_elgammal)), and his regime ([Fathi
Sorour](http://twitter.com/#!/AhmedFathiSoror), [Safwat El-
Sharif](http://twitter.com/#!/Safwatelsharif) and [Ahmed
Nazif](http://twitter.com/#!/ahmednazef)) have also been created to make fun
of them.

[![Car carrying banners in celebration of the detention of Mubarak, posted on
Yfrog.](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2011/04/MubarakCar-375x281.jpg)](http://yfrog.com/gywj1awj)

Car carrying banners in celebration of the detention of Mubarak, posted on
Yfrog.

Finally, despite all this, and despite [the list of Mubarak's anti-
achievements](http://ahmedhayman.wordpress.com/2011/04/15/mubaraks-
achievements/) written by Ahmed Hayman, some people still sympathise with the
former president:

@[MontuEssam](http://twitter.com/#!/MontuEssam/statuses/58573039884967936):
اقسم بالله انا بقيت حزين انى مصرى لما اشوف كميه الغل والحقد والتشفى اللى فى
شعب مص هو ايه اللى بيحصل هو احنا وحشين من جوانا اوى كدا؟

@[MontuEssam](http://twitter.com/#!/MontuEssam/statuses/58573039884967936): I
swear to God I'm now sad to be an Egyptian, because of what I'm seeing now.
How come the Egyptian people carries all this amount of hatred and will to
take revenge! What's going? Are we really that bad?

_**This post is part of our special coverage[Egypt Revolution
2011](https://globalvoicesonline.org/specialcoverage/egypt-protests-2011/).**_

