[![](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2011/03/lgbt.jpg)](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2011/03/lgbt.jpg)

Colombian Campaign on Sexual Identity in High School

In Colombia, the [government of Medellin
](http://www.medellin.edu.co/sites/Educativo/Estudiantes/Paginas/ED62_ST_DiversidadSexualColegio.aspx)has
started a campaign to raise awareness on sexual diversity in high schools, and
part of the campaign includes [online videos](http://vimeo.com/album/1545785)
of different students speaking about their experiences.

Take [Isabela](http://vimeo.com/16222973), for example: She's been an advocate
for herself since she had to speak to government authorities to intercede on
her behalf and get her parents to support her decision to return to school not
as a boy, as she had done to that moment, but as the girl she felt she was.
After that first hitch, she found that her school not only supported her
decision but actually commended her for being true to herself. She insists
that although some students are hostile, she's also found support and less
harassment than she expected. However, she's also had to knock some heads
together to get the point across that she won't stand for being abused or
insulted.

[Katerine ](http://vimeo.com/16217167)believes that being honest about her
sexual identity has been the key to being accepted. In her case, classmates
took it in stride when she came out as bisexual and she insists that even if
some people feel strange or reject her, it is their loss and not hers.

[Mauricio ](http://vimeo.com/16218318)also came out as gay in his high school:
he's found that most rejection comes from ignorance and fear and he fights
back with knowledge. When his classmates tell him he can't sit or go into an
area because it is “for men” he insists that he is a student of the school,
and a human being. He also declares that the problem is not with gay people,
but with homophobia.

[Zulangie](http://vimeo.com/16218865) decided to come out as a lesbian in her
school as a way to remove prejudices: teachers, students and administration
had put up posters and had said homophobic statements so she decided that
being up front about who she was would be a better way to prove that their
assumptions and prejudices were wrong.

[Harold](http://vimeo.com/16219569) is straight, but in his interview he takes
the opportunity to speak on behalf of the gay community and how those who have
come out of the closet can help those who haven't to open up and be
themselves.

And teacher [Luz Ángela](http://vimeo.com/16217916) also gives her
perspective: She teaches Ethics and Values at a High School and underlines
that they respect students personal decisions and they encourage others to
respect diversity: that High School should be a safe place for students to be
themselves while learning how to deal with feelings, emotions and caring.

