_As a graduate student at the University of Chicago, I have had the pleasure
of studying with Mexican journalist and memoirist Alma Guillermoprieto. This
post is based on an interview that I conducted with Ms. Guillermoprieto in
October of 2010._

At the start of her career [Alma
Guillermoprieto](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Alma_Guillermoprieto) gained
wide recognition as a journalist for her ground-breaking investigation of the
[1981 massacre at El
Mozote](http://www.markdanner.com/articles/show/the_truth_of_el_mozote), El
Salvador, where nearly eight hundred peasants were killed by the Salvadoran
army during the nation’s civil war. Over the last thirty years, she has
written for _The Washington Post_ , _The New Yorker_ , and _The New York
Review of Books_ , covering everyone from [Fidel
Castro](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fidel_castro), to [Carlos
Salinas](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Carlos_Salinas), to leaders of the
Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia
([FARC](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/FARC)).

She is an old-school story-teller, a journalist who says that she doesn’t have
an “Internet life.” But over the last two months, she has led an online
project in response to the mass killing of seventy-two migrants that took
place in the Mexican state of Tamaulipas in August.

_[72 Migrantes](http://72migrantes.com/) _[es] is “a virtual altar” to the
slayed migrants.

[![](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2010/10/Picture-1-375x286.png)](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2010/10/31/americas-
virtual-memorial-for-72-victims-of-migrant-mass-killing/picture-1-10/)

Logo by site designer Daniel Castrejon

Like thousands before them, these men and women left their homes in Ecuador,
El Salvador, Guatemala, Honduras, and Brazil for work in the United States.
But their journey ended in a warehouse, some one hundred miles from the US-
Mexico border, where seventy-two bodies were found on August 23rd. Most had
been shot in the back of the head. Among the four who escaped, only one has
given an account of the massacre. Thirty of the victims remain unidentified.

After the news of the mass killing broke, Guillermoprieto contacted Lolita
Bosch, editor of _[Nuestra Aparente Rendición
](http://nuestraaparenterendicion.blogspot.com/)_[es], an online forum of
artists and intellectuals who work in or are native to Mexico and are appalled
by what they see happening to the country. Through the site, and through
personal contacts, they convened a group of writers, asking them to write
about each of the victims. On _[Nuestra Mirada](http://nuestramirada.org/)_
[es], a website for Latin American photojournalists, a call went out for
photographs of migrants. Over the next few weeks, writers, photographers, and
web designers volunteered their time and skills to create 72migrantes.com.

“We wanted to create something that would reach the families of the victims,”
Guillermoprieto says, “and to create an altar for Day of the Dead.”

“In a real altar, you give people back their faces by putting up their
pictures. You make them live again through memory.”

She points to the different features of _72 Migrantes_ , explaining that each
part of the site corresponds to a different part of the experience of visiting
an altar “in 3-D” (in real life.) On the [Day of the
Dead](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Day_of_the_dead), you visit the altars of
your loved ones; you sing to the departed, leave them flowers, and share food
with them.

At _72 Migrantes_ , you can listen to music for the dead (click ‘[descargar
canciones](http://www.72migrantes.com/descargas.php)’), leave a rose icon
(click ‘[dejar una rosa](http://www.72migrantes.com/visitas.php)’), and share
food with living migrants by making a donation (click
‘[donaciones](http://www.72migrantes.com/donaciones.php)’). Donations are sent
directly to Father Alejandro Solalinde of [Hermanos en el
Camino](http://www.hermanosenelcamino.com/), a church organization that
provides food, shelter and support to migrants and those who have been
kidnapped or threatened by drug and human traffickers in Mexico.

[![](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-content/uploads/2010/10/en-el-
camino-20-375x249.jpg)](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2010/10/31/americas-
virtual-memorial-for-72-victims-of-migrant-mass-killing/en-el-camino-20/)

Photograph by Edu Ponces, part of collection at 72migrantes.com

The centerpiece of _72 Migrantes_ is a collection of narratives and
photographs, one for each of the victims. The authors (among them [Elena
Poniatowska](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Elena_Poniatowska),[ Jorge
Volpi](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Jorge_Volpi), and [Juan
Villoro](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Juan_Villoro)) have written the stories
of the dead by seeking information about their lives, often from their loved
ones. But most families of the migrants have been too afraid to identify
themselves publicly. Many of the authors, with little more than a name, have
written narratives that fall somewhere between obituary and testimonial. And
others have chosen to write the stories of the unidentified by imagining the
lives of their subjects.

“The people I care most about,” Guillermoprieto says, “are those who have been
stripped even of their names by this horrible thing.”

“I still don’t have a clue as to who did this,” she says. The only witness who
has come forward has testified that the killers identified themselves as
members of the [Zetas](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Zetas_%28Mexico%29), the
most notoriously violent drug group in Mexico. Guillermoprieto describes the
crime scenes that the Zetas have left in the past—they are bloody, violent.
She is not completely satisfied with the attribution of this latest atrocity
to the Zetas, contending that the plain, clean nature of the Tamaulipas
massacre was highly unusual for the organization.

As a Mexican, Guillermoprieto says the massacre left her with a deep feeling
of shame “that these seventy-two people were killed by Mexicans in Mexico.” In
response, she says that she wanted to create something that would stand as a
witness to the crime and to the memory of the victims. And she wanted to
create a place where people in Mexico and all over the Americas could come to
pay their respects and sit, virtually, with the departed.

