[![](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-content/uploads/2011/04/logo-
sub.png)](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-content/uploads/2011/04/logo-
sub.png)The Deutsche Welle International Blog Awards, known as The BOBs are
one of the most important awards for content producers online. One of their 17
categories is the [award for Best Video Channel ](http://thebobs.dw-
world.de/en/nominations/?cat=12)and today we'll get to know a bit more about
the 11 nominees you can vote for.

[Yaqoob in Japan](http://www.facebook.com/pages/Yaqoob-in-Japan-
Show-%D9%8A%D8%B9%D9%82%D9%88%D8%A8-%D9%81%D9%8A-%D8%A7%D9%84%D9%8A%D8%A7%D8%A8%D8%A7%D9%86/70557768246?sk=app_2392950137)
is the videoblog of [Jacoub Al-
Slaise](https://globalvoicesonline.org/author/yacoub-slaise/), a Bahraini
living in Nagoya, Japan. In his video posts he tells a bit about his cross-
cultural experiences: sightseeing and feeding deer in Nara, walking around the
city, flower arranging, sumo and even a guide to having babies in Japan. This
[next video](http://www.facebook.com/video/video.php?v=422729216292) [ar] has
Yacoob showing us around his apartment:

From Bangladesh comes [Unnayan TV](http://www.machizo.com/unnayantv), an
online TV channel featuring many documentaries on the topics of development,
cultural issues, education and human rights. For example, [this short
piece](http://youtu.be/Cnikkuey8m0) speaks about rickshaws, explaining their
cultural importance and how new legislation is affecting rickshaw pullers’ who
now have an even harder time making a decent living. Or [this next
video](http://www.machizo.com/projectsarchive/unnayantv/humanrights/littlewarrior),
showing how although there are laws and embargoes to products made using child
labor, this is still pervasive in Bangladesh:

[Stands with a Fist](http://www.youtube.com/user/standswithfist60) is a
nominee from Iran, selected due to the channel's importance during the Green
Revolution in Iran. The most watched video of his site is [We are all Majid
Tavakoli](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=xNgN1rbXjLc). After the police
detained student leader Maji Tavakoli, the media showed pictures of him
dressed in female garb, the police said he had put on the hijab to be able to
escape arrest. Iranian citizens believed that he had been dressed that way to
ridicule and discredit him so to show their support they [took pictures and
made videos of themselves wearing head scarves as
well](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2009/12/12/iran-men-in-hijab-to-support-
jailed-student/):

Shawn Ahmed of The Uncultured Project has been featured several times here in
Global Voices as well: his humanitarian work in Bangladesh has inspired many.
Whether it is doing [disaster relief
](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2008/01/05/bangladesh-cyclone-sidr-relief-
efforts/)with funds raised through online activism, [working to get people
clean water ](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2009/08/10/bangladesh-uncultured-
project-and-clean-water/)or [helping build
schools](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2010/07/28/bangladesh-one-child-to-
rebuild-a-school/), his heart is in the right place and his videos help bring
the message home. In this [next
video](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=CFLg57CnHfI), he tackles the important
subject of “eve teasing” and how this sexual harassment is, in a girl's own
words a terrible psychological torture that makes them weak:

[Grani.tv [ru]](http://grani-tv.ru/) is from Russia, and according to the
description on the BOBs’ website it is the place where people get together to
see and discuss investigative reports, interviews, human rights issues,
opinions from opposition politicians and more. In [this video](http://grani-
tv.ru/entries/1705/), naturalists try to stop the cutting down of some trees
in Moscow:

  
[Грани-ТВ](http://grani-tv.ru/): [Химки: новые бои](http://grani-
tv.ru/entries/1705/)

[Isla Presidencial ](http://www.elchiguirebipolar.net/isla-
presidencial/)(Presidential Island) is a web series by Venezuelan animators of
false news outlet [elChiguirebipolar.net](http://www.elchiguirebipolar.net/),
who decided to see what would happen if presidents from different Latin
American nations ended up in a deserted island after a presidential summit.
The Presidential Island is quite successful [not only in
Venezuela](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2010/12/01/venezuela-comics-find-
their-place-on-the-web-2-0/), but also[ the rest of Latin
America](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2010/07/25/venezuela-and-colombia-
online-political-cartoons-add-humor-to-current-event/). In the[ latest
episode](http://youtu.be/AAjPD-M7SNE) [es], after fixing a radio they overhear
that poverty, debt and other issues in their countries have been eliminated
after their disappearance the information gets interrupted by a mayday call
from a plane which crashes on the island. They decide to check out the
wreckage and later meet with other heads of state who appeared on the island
as a time vortex forced them to cross themselves in the past and future… and
then we see a mysterious character who may just be the mastermind behind this
all.

[Lao Hu Miao](http://www.youtube.com/user/zhangshihe) (Tiger Temple)
videoblogs from behind the Firewall of China about life, culture and human
rights in China. Citizen journalism, interviews and road trip videos showing
the sights around Beijing fill the channel. Like this [next
video](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=V-BZocUkE4Q) showing the Dongyang Hill
Temple:

After the Haiti earthquake lots of media focused on the region, but as the
time passed, foreign interest began to wane and [advances in the
reconstruction of Haiti ](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2010/10/22/a-journey-
through-the-unheard-voices-of-haiti%E2%80%99s-reconstruction/)stopped making
the international news. That's where[ Goudou-Goudou [fr]](http://www.goudou-
goudou.net/) comes in: with a team of journalists and media specialists
they've managed to keep people informed about what is going on in Haiti, and
what the situation is like more than 1 year after the Earthquake. For example,
[this video](http://www.dailymotion.com/video/xejzde_lyart-une-reponse-au-
cauchemar-des_travel) on Plas Timoun an initiative that is using [art to help
support the psychological health](http://www.goudou-goudou.net/fr/?p=23) of
kids still living in the tent villages.

  
[L’art, une réponse au cauchemar des
enfants…](http://www.dailymotion.com/video/xejzde_lyart-une-reponse-au-
cauchemar-des_travel)
_por[AsianProjekt](http://www.dailymotion.com/AsianProjekt)_

Engage Media focuses on the Asian Pacific region, and [curates video
content](https://globalvoicesonline.org/?s=Engagemedia) submitted by people in
the region who try to bring attention to their issues, concerns and causes.
Like this documentary done by an artistic group which is painting murals
around Yogyakarta in Indonesia, for example:

[Project Germany ](http://www.interviewproject.de/en/videos)follows two
filmmakers as they travel around Germany and interview people they meet along
the way until they reach the 50 interview mark. So far there are 9 interviews
on the site, and this is the latest one:

[Rodrigo Leitão](http://www.youtube.com/user/porcpigao) from Brazil has
previous experience as a cultural reporter, and he uses it to his advantage in
his YouTube channel where he showcases the lives of Brazilians. In[ this video
[pt]](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=BOv5eEA-yeM) he visits Sebastião Martins
Vieira, a pen salesman who has been in business 53 years and who obviously is
passionate about what he does as he shares his fountain pen collection and his
thoughts:

These are all 11 nominees for the Best of Blogs Video Channel Award: did you
like one in particular? Let them know your appreciation by [voting for them
](http://thebobs.dw-world.de/en/nominations/?cat=12)and getting them closer to
winning the audience award. Voting closes on April 11th, and you can cast one
vote each 24 hours.

[disclosure: Jacoub Al-Slaise is a Global Voices contributor who has been very
active in reporting the [recent developments in
Bahrain](https://globalvoicesonline.org/author/yacoub-slaise/)]

