![](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-content/uploads/2011/04/urmugolun-
qorutaq-tebriz-1.jpg)

Dozens of [protesters were arrested on April 2,
2011](http://en.trend.az/regions/iran/1854991.html) in [Iran's Azerbaijan
region](https://secure.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/wiki/Azerbaijan_%28Iran%29)
in the cities Tabriz and Urmia (northwestern Iran). This time protests were
not for democracy and freedom, but instead demands for the government to
protect [Lake
Urmia](https://secure.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/wiki/Lake_urmia), one of the
world's largest salt water lakes.

The construction of a dam on part of the lake accompanied by a recent drought
has significantly decreased the annual amount of water Urmia receives. This in
turn has increased the salinity, repelling many birds.

Protesters cried: “Lake Urmia is burning of thirst”, and “Break down dams and
let water flow into the Lake Urmia”.

On the website _Tabrizsesi_ , there are [several photos – like the one
above](http://www.tebrizsesi.com/site/news/10-azerbaycan/3542-tebriz-sekiller)
of today's demonstration.

_Az inavr o Oonvar_ [says](http://gargagarga.blogspot.com/2011/04/blog-
post.html)[fa]

> Today we can say that Iranian Azerbaijani people rose up and protested to
> save Lake Urmia. Other Iranian citizens in different cities such as Tehran
> and Shiraz should support this movement as a sign of solidarity.

_Urmuiscileri_ blog [writes](http://urmuiscileri.blogspot.com/2011/04/blog-
post_3463.html) [fa] that according to eye witnesses, around 300 people
attempted to start a demonstration in Urmia, but they were repressed by
security forces and several people were arrested.

Lake Urmia [has](http://www.abdolian.com/thoughts/?p=4706) 102 islands, the
second largest being, Kaboudi. This is the burial place of Hulagu Khan, the
grandson of [Genghis
Khan](https://secure.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/wiki/Genghis_Khan), emperor of
the Mongol empire. One of the earliest mentions of Lake Urmia is from the
Assyrian records from 9th century BCE. See photos of its beauty on
[Abdolian.com](http://www.abdolian.com/thoughts/?p=4706).

