**_This post is part of our special coverage[Indigenous
Rights](https://globalvoicesonline.org/specialcoverage/indigenous-rights/) and
[Global Development 2011](https://globalvoicesonline.org/specialcoverage/un-
millennium-development-goals-in-2011/)._**

Indigenous communities in Colombia are taking steps to protect their food
security. Not only are they educating their communities to eat what they grow
on their vegetable gardens instead of buying expensive food brought from
outside but they are also protesting new laws and regulations limiting their
access to milk.

[![Vegetables](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2011/03/acinfood1-375x277.jpg)](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2011/03/acinfood1.jpg)

Products grown by the indigenous communities

This [first video](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=--NyfiwdJ48) (in Spanish)
shows a community gathering at the indigenous reservation of Huellas Caloto
where different townships were invited to bring food made out of ingredients
they grow on their own plots of land. Pumpkin juice, porridge, corn cakes and
other products were used as delicious examples of how their diet doesn't have
to depend on imported or purchased goods, but on local and traditional
ingredients.

In these next two videos (also in Spanish) we can see the indigenous Misak
community who among others marched to the capital city of Bogotá to protest a
new law that would make selling raw milk illegal. In their communities, where
they buy milk from neighbors and supplement their diets locally, putting a
restriction on raw milk would mean that they would have to buy processed milk
at much higher prices, affecting both milk buyers and sellers. The videos are
titled “Milk in Cans doesn't Kill, Hunger Does”

[Part 1](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=2So1IiXE3CA)

[Part 2](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ZFzH7LSleN4)

Water security is also an important issue: in the [following video
](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=7gAolg3JbAM)the Communication School of
Northern Cauca shows us two separate cases of water issues and how to solve
them. In the first case, a woman is washing clothes in the river, and a
neighbor comes up to her and kindly tells her that because she is washing
clothes in the river, downstream they are getting soapy water. She apologizes
and admits that she wasn't aware that her actions were affecting someone else
negatively but that she'll ask at home if they can build her an area to do
washing where she doesn't contaminate the river. To this, the neighbor replies
that they'll gladly give her a hand in figuring out a solution, and help them
build it. The second scene shows tourists near the river bank, where they have
a picnic but leave all their trash behind them. A member of the indigenous
community comes along afterwards and complaining about the littering, picks up
the trash.

You can follow these and other activities of the indigenous communities in
Colombia through [their website](http://nasaacin.org) in Spanish.

**_This post is part of our special coverage[Indigenous
Rights](https://globalvoicesonline.org/specialcoverage/indigenous-rights/) and
[Global Development 2011](https://globalvoicesonline.org/specialcoverage/un-
millennium-development-goals-in-2011/)._**

