_**This post is part of our special coverage[Libya Uprising
2011](https://globalvoicesonline.org/specialcoverage/libya-uprising-2011/).**_

Videos continue to seep out from war-torn Libya as protesters battle Colonel
Muammar Gaddafi's forces in a bid to overthrow his 42-year-old regime. Here is
a selection of the latest videos taken by netizens on the frontlines of major
cities where the battle for Libya is still fought.

The city of Ajdabiya, 160 kilometers south of Benghazi, was captured by
Gaddafi forces in mid-March. Many of the 130,000 residents fled leaving behind
a ghost town. The few remaining had to endure a harsh siege and daily
bombardment, in a city deprived from water and electricity. The following
video shows the destruction suffered by civilian areas in the city. When the
cameraman asks a young man in the street how he managed to stay, he answers
“We've been living is a state of fear” while raising his hand to display a
Victory sign. (Video posted by
[benghazi17feb](http://www.youtube.com/user/benghazi17feb))

Early on Saturday, and following Coalition air-strikes against Gaddafi forces,
pro-democracy fighters could enter the city again, delivering the opposition
it's first major victory since the start of the enforcement of a No-Fly zone
over Libya.

Az Zintan, 160 kilometers south-west of Tripoli, is the scene of an ongoing
battle. Gaddafi forces have been shelling the city for days in an attempt to
force pro-democracy fighters out. In the following video rebels claim victory
against key positions of Gaddafi loyalists in the outskirts of the disputed
city. (Video posted by [zintan2011](http://www.youtube.com/user/zintan2011))

Misurata is the third largest city in Libya. It was captured by pro-democracy
forces back in February prompting a ferocious riposte by pro-Gaddafi forces.
The regime reportedly sent warships to the city's port, used heavy artillery
and succeeded in breaching the city in mid-March. The situation in Misurata
remains unclear. The bombardment of the city by Gaddafi loyalists continues
although coalition planes are said to have forced an intermittent halt of the
shelling. The following video demonstrates an aspect of the violence that the
city has endured: a minaret is being targeted, taking multiple hits before it
finally collapses (video posted by
[ibnomar2005](http://www.youtube.com/user/ibnomar2005)):

Also from Misurata, this video which claims to show snipers posted on roofs
(video posted by
[TheLibyaFreedom](http://www.youtube.com/user/TheLibyaFreedom)):

Benghazi in the East is the stronghold of pro-democracy forces who seized it
in the early days of February 17 uprising. On March 18, Gaddafi troops attempt
to retake the city was repelled by opposition forces but Militiamen loyal to
the Libyan leader kept operating within the city by night. Citizens organized
vigilante groups to patrol and guard neighborhoods as shown in the following
video (video posted by
[AliveinLibya](http://www.youtube.com/user/AliveinLibya)):

Tripoli has been the stronghold of the regime from the start of the Libyan
uprising. State-run TV wants to depict it as a city fully loyal to Gaddafi.
The following video however shows demonstrators clearly identifying themselves
as inhabitants of the capital city shouting hostile slogans to the Libyan
leader while sustained gun fire seems to be aimed at them. “They are not
firing in the air” says one of them, while another person is heard asking the
cameraman to keep on filming. Protesters can be heard chanting “No God but
God, Gaddafi is the enemy of God … Where are the men of Tripoli?”. (Video
posted by [QuatchiCanada](http://www.youtube.com/user/QuatchiCanada).)

_UPDATE 3/29: This video is no longer available, a note on YouTube says: “This
video has been removed by the user.”_

_**This post is part of our special coverage[Libya Uprising
2011](https://globalvoicesonline.org/specialcoverage/libya-uprising-2011/).**_

