[![Radiation symbol, photo by Michael
Hicks](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2011/03/radiation-375x250.jpg)](http://www.flickr.com/photos/mulad/1737651749/)

Radiation symbol, photo by Michael Hicks

The crowdsourcing project of mapping radiation levels in Russia measured by
private dosimeters not only became an interesting case of digital activism,
but also showed some effects its creators didn’t even think of.

**Disaster Triggers Online Activity**

While writing the [article on nuclear
debate](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2011/03/14/russia-fukushima-plant-
disaster-trigger-nuclear-power-debate/) provoked by the series of explosions
at “Fukushima 1″ nuclear plant, I’ve noticed that in the comments section of
news articles, as well as at the local message boards, Internet users were
exchanging the data on radiation levels in their cities. Excited by the
observation, I offered to Gregory Asmolov, a RuNet Echo contributing editor,
to create a crowdsourcing map that would structure these chaotic data and
provide comprehensive information on radiation levels in the regions
surrounding Japan.

It took one night for Gregory to create this
[map](http://radiation.crowdmap.com/) (later called “Radiation Map”) at
_Crowdmap.com_ , online _Ushahidi_ service. And unlike in our [previous
project,](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2010/08/10/russia-russian-fires-ru-
the-first-ushahidi-experience/) we didn’t have to go through the painful
process of bug-fixing and editing Russian translations of Ushahidi
installation. We were also able to make a multi-lingual platform offering
opportunities to map radiation for English-speakers. After sending a few links
to the interested parties (like Russian _Greenpeace_ , which helped a lot in
spreading the news about the project), we started inviting moderators. Five
out of six moderators that joined Radiation Map came from the Help Map
project. This proves the
[point](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2010/10/23/russia-post-emergency-
sustainability-of-crowdsourcing-projects/) of Gregory Asmolov that
crowdsourcing initiatives from one emergency case to another form a core of
activists willing to participate in the next projects.

In the United States, a similar map-based project _rdtn.org_ had been launched
several days later. Almost simultaneous appearance of several projects doing
basically the same thing illustrated that mapping became a somewhat
“conditioned reflex” of the bloggers all over the world. If radio gave each
event a sound, TV – an image, then this relatively new ‘mapping reflex’ gave
each event a geographical location.

**Unplanned Usage**

The initial idea of Radiation Map was to organize the chaotic data from the
personal dosimeters in the Russian regions neighboring Japan. Most personal
readings have proven (and keep proving) that there’s no increase in the
radiation level on the Russian side, and thus all rumors about the “nuclear
plume” are highly exaggerated by the conventional media.

Then, the users started to report reading and ask to measure radiation levels
in their own areas. The requests were made from the cities on the other side
of the globe – in the European Russia, some eight-nine thousand kilometers
from Japan. What’s even more interesting, other users started to reply to the
requests, providing dosimeter data and supporting it with the photos of
dosimeters.

The Radiation Map not only helped organize information and lower the panic
around Fukushima, but also assisted in re-discovering Russian territories
heavily contaminated with radiation. The [following
message](http://radiation.crowdmap.com/reports/view/142) [ru] represents one –
and so far, the only – case of such “re-discovery”:

> Автомагистраль Челябинск-Екатеринбург. Возле моста фон – 340 мкР/час. В 20
> метрах от моста 310 мкР/час. Замерено радиометром “Нейва”.
>
> Комментарий Дениса Куландина:  
>  При мощности экспозиционной дозы естественного фона (5-30) мкР/ч, показания
> на индикаторе должны быть в пределах 5 – 30 мкР/ч. Опасной считается доза в
> 50 микрорентген. Тут речь идет об опасном для жизни уровне! Необходимо
> проверить показания! Я отправил письмо, ожидаю ответа.

Highway somewhere between Chelyabinsk and Yekaterinburg. Next to the bridge
[over [Techa river](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Techa_River)] – 340
microroentgen per hour. In 20 meters from the bridge – 310 microroentgen per
hour. Measured with “Neiva” [ _Russian brand – GV_ ] dosimeter.

Denis Kulandin [ _one of the Radiation Map moderators – GV_ ] commented:  
Considering that the exposure dose of the natural radiation level is about
5-30 microroentgen per hour, the data on the [ _dosimeter – GV_ ] indicator
should be within these values. The radiation level is considered dangerous
starting from the level of 50 microroentgen per hour. Now, that is the
dangerous level! We need to check this data! I've sent a letter, waiting for
the answer.

[Techa
river](http://www.google.ru/search?sourceid=chrome&ie=UTF-8&q=techa+river) is
a famous case of radioactive contamination for physicians all over the world
(as one article re-phrased a famous meme: “In Soviet Russia, Lake Contaminates
You”). Back in 1957, a [Kyshtym
disaster](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Kyshtym_disaster) happened (the second
most destructive nuclear disaster in the human history after Chernobyl). For
many Russians, however, the story is still either unknown or the radioactive
contamination is perceived not dangerous.

Commenter named Pavel (in his e-mail he wrote that he's a local journalist)
[explained](http://radiation.crowdmap.com/reports/view/142) [ru] the nature of
unusually high level of the radiation:

> […] Это последствия сброса жидких радиоактивных отходов ПО “Маяк” в каскад
> Теченских водоемов. Странно что на этом сайте это не было отмечено ранее…
> Выше по течению (как можно видеть на карте) и располагается этот каскад. Там
> фон, я думаю, в тысячи раз выше того, что я намерил на этом мосту.[…]

[…] These are the consequences of the liquid radioactive waste discharge from
[Mayak chemical plant](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mayak) [ _early Cold War
nuclear plant – GV_ ] to the cascade of Techa reservoirs. It is strange that
no one had pointed out this place before… As you can see on the map, the
cascade is situated upstream. The radiation level there, I think, is thousand
times higher than at the bridge where I made my radiation measurement […]

When the Radiation Map was created, the both cases of self-help in spreading
radiation data and re-discovery of contaminated places were not planned . This
unusual usage illustrates how people inhabitate digital spaces and use
platform functionality in the ways limited only by their creativity.

