A number of Balkan countries were scheduled to run a census this spring:
Macedonia, Bulgaria, Kosovo, Albania, and Bosnia and Herzegovina. Local
observers link the ability to perform this operation to viability and maturity
of a state.

When the ‘census season’ was announced in 2010, _Dzhaman_ did a test [press
clipping](http://dzam.blog.mk/2010/09/13/popis-na-balkanot-prolet-2011/) [MKD]
from various countries. At the time, Macedonian bloggers were mainly
discussing the situation in the neighboring Bulgaria and Albania, criticizing
these states for not allowing the local [ethnic
Macedonians](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ethnic_Macedonians) state their
ethnic affiliation and be counted.

Bulgaria at first had this option, but backtracked. Its census is under way.
In Albania, officials promised certain changes to the
[minorities](http://prespanews.com/index.php?option=com_content&view=article&id=959:2010-11-21-19-10-24&catid=46:svet)
[MKD] who threatened boycott, but now face
[disagreement](http://www.setimes.com/cocoon/setimes/xhtml/en_GB/newsbriefs/setimes/newsbriefs/2011/03/01/nb-02)
from the majority.

Macedonian bloggers viewed these situations as part of ongoing campaigns for
assimilation of ethnic minorities, with discussions often steering toward hate
speech, involving labeling and invoking history. For instance, _1979_ cited
this and [the arrest](http://www.tocka.com.mk/index13.php?ID=31781) [MKD] of
the owner and employee of a printing company in
[Blagoevgrad](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Blagoevgrad), Bulgaria, who
prepared an ethnic Macedonian periodical, an instance of [21-century
fascism](http://predvesniknaburata.blog.mk/2011/02/01/bugarski-fashizam-21-vi-
vek/) [MKD], reminding that Bulgaria sided with Nazi Germany in the [Second
World War](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/World_War_II).

Inclusion of ethnic and religious affiliations is not a controversial issue in
the multi-ethnic Republic of Macedonia. But, as certain “collective rights”
guaranteed by law are linked to the number of people registered in a given
territory, statistical results have an explosive political potential. For
instance, while Macedonian is the official language of state and local
administration, other languages automatically become official on municipal
level, too, if the number of their native speakers is above 20% of the
population. Since the last Census (2002) showed that [ethnic
Albanians](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Albanians) comprise around 25% of the
total population, the Parliament uses Albanian as its official language, in
addition to Macedonian. This is also linked with the
“[Badinter](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Robert_Badinter) principle” of
decision making: proposals involving ethnic aspects need support both on the
general level and from representatives of non-majority ethnic groups (if they
comprise over 20%).

[![](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-content/uploads/2011/03/macedonia-
census-375x263.jpg)](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2011/03/macedonia-census.jpg)

In Macedonia, controversies began with the traditional media publishing
“predictions” that the real results can turn out far different than in 2002.
Then some of the ethnic Albanian opposition parties demanded that the Census
take place in July instead of April, in order to make sure that ethnic
Albanians who work abroad and come back to Macedonia for summer holiday are
counted. The administration refused, citing the examples of Albania and
Kosovo, which also have a lot of [guest
workers](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Guest_workers), but scheduled their
census for April anyway. Albania in fact just decided to postpone its census,
but for a different reason – due to the early local elections.

A more serious problem of boycott by the ethnic Albanian and
[Turkish](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Turks) members of the [State Census
Committee](http://www.stat.gov.mk/Popis2011/Default.aspx) arose due to the
composition of local census committees, over the rule that it has to have an
ethnic Macedonian member, regardless of the ethnic composition of the area.
[According](http://www.prespasky.com/index.php?option=com_content&view=article&id=2218:2011-02-20-17-55-46&catid=34:2009-02-10-03-59-41&Itemid=110)
[MKD] to local portal _PrespaSky_ , other ethnic communities, such as
[Vlach](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Vlachs), also joined the boycott.

In addition, Vasko Krajchevski
[wrote](http://vaskokrajcevski.blog.mk/2011/02/22/ne-za-proletni-da-za-
esenski-izbori/) [MKD] about the looming
[early](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2011/02/22/macedonia-early-elections-
imminent-date-uncertain/)
[elections](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2011/02/28/macedonia-musings-on-
the-early-elections/):

> Another important moment is a certain large-scale statistical operation
> called **the Census**. If early elections take place in May, the Census
> surely will not take place in April. What are they trying to prove? Nothing,
> they just want to play with tenders for four more years. If they want to
> remove the political (ethnic) label from the Census, they should change the
> Constitution and declare that the [[Framework
> Agreement](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ohrid_Agreement)] is valid for those
> below the (infamous) 20%.

In her latest statement, the president of the State Census Committee
[said](http://www.idividi.com.mk/vesti/makedonija/666375/index.html) [MKD]
that “the Government has not informed them about any delays of the Census.”

