_**This post is part of our special coverage[Bahrain Protests
2011](https://globalvoicesonline.org/specialcoverage/bahrain-
protests-2011/).**_

As the international media focus shifts toward Libya and the rapidly unfolding
events there, Bahrain government is unleashing a violent assault on pro-
democracy protesters. Five people have been killed on Wednesday when security
forces attacked anti-government demonstrators who have been rallying on Pearl
(Lulu) Roundabout in the capital Manama. A three-month state of emergency was
declared this week and a daily curfew was put in place. Many human rights
activists, political activists and protesters were arrested, while others were
reported missing. Amid media blackout, citizens are taking their cameras out
and filming what the state-run media doesn't want you to see.

Here's a video timeline of Bahrain protests as posted by blogger [_Chan'ad
Bahraini 2.0_](http://chanad.posterous.com/) who comments:

> [S]ince the start of this latest uprising on 14th of February, dozens of […]
> cases of excessive force have been captured on video. It has finally given
> solid proof of the type of abusive practices that the security forces — and
> by extension the regime in Bahrain — have been employing for years.

**Warning: some of the videos posted here are graphic in nature. Viewer's
discretion is advised.**

**February 14, 2011**

The first day of the protests was marked by a violent crackdown as shown in
this video from Diraz showing Riot police fire rubber bullets and gas
canisters at unarmed protesters (video posted on Youtube by
[smohd92](http://www.youtube.com/user/smohd92)):

In Daih, Riot police fire on protesters at short range (video posted by
[margadoosh](http://www.youtube.com/user/margadoosh)):

In Sehla, riot police attack protesters unprovoked (video posted by[
albahrain2011](http://www.youtube.com/user/albahrain2011)):

Sehla – the same scene from a different angle (video posted by
[alsehlawy12](http://www.youtube.com/user/alsehlawy12)):

In Sitra police brutalizes unarmed protester carrying Bahraini flag (video
posted by [retman96](http://www.youtube.com/user/retman96)):

**February 17**

The government attacks unarmed protesters camped at Pearl (Lulu) Roundabout in
the capital Manama at 3am (video posted by
[simsim7501](http://www.youtube.com/user/simsim7501)):

**February 18**

Manama – Protesters try to approach Lulu roundabout chanting “Peaceful!
Peaceful!”. They are shot at with live rounds (video posted by[
shaffeem](http://www.youtube.com/user/shaffeem)):

**[Warning: GRAPHIC VIDEO]**

**March 13**

Unarmed protester is shot with rubber bullets several times at point-blank
range (video posted by [ali9566](http://www.youtube.com/user/ali9566)):

Police shoots at a cameraman filming near the University of Bahrain (posted by
[EncryptedReality2](http://www.youtube.com/user/EncryptedReality2)):

**March 15**

In Sitra, anti-riot police brutalizes a protester before apparently shooting
at him at point-blank range (posted by
[NaserAlshea](http://www.youtube.com/user/NaserAlshea)):

**March 16**

In Megsha unarmed protester with arms raised is shot at (video posted by
[almeel1](http://www.youtube.com/user/almajed414)):

In Saar, Riot police brutalize a driver at checkpoint (video posted by
[BHR142011](http://www.youtube.com/user/BHR142011) — Audio is disabled):

The following videos show anti-riot police deliberately smashing up civilian
cars (videos posted by [mjarexmja](http://www.youtube.com/user/mjarexmja) and
[EncryptedReality2](http://www.youtube.com/user/EncryptedReality2)
respectively):

More videos available on [_Chan'ad Bahraini
2.0_](http://chanad.posterous.com/) blog.

_**This post is part of our special coverage[Bahrain Protests
2011](https://globalvoicesonline.org/specialcoverage/bahrain-
protests-2011/).**_

