Today, March 20, Haitians go to the polls to decide who will be the Caribbean
nation's next president. This runoff election is [being contested by Mirlande
Manigat and Michel Martelly](http://jamaica-
gleaner.com/gleaner/20110320/focus/focus6.html), the two candidates deemed to
have received the highest number of votes in the controversial general
election held last November. Reports posted this morning by Twitter users on
the ground in Haiti pointed to delays in the opening of polling stations,
while many outside the country fixated on an incident in which Haiti-born rap
star Wyclef Jean, a Martelly supporter, [was shot in the
hand](http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/entertainment-arts-12799421). Here's a
selection of photos posted on Twitter of the scenes in Haiti as the polls
opened—or tried to—this morning.

[![@melindayiti: Small crowd at Cite Soleil voting bureau, already
open](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2011/03/citesoleil.jpg)](http://yfrog.com/h0nr3cyj)

@melindayiti: "Small crowd at Cite Soleil voting bureau, already open". The
vast Cité Soleil slum is as one of the poorest and most dangerous areas in
Haiti.

![@vivehaiti: "Urne vid pa idantifye donk poko gen vot nan lise danyel la."
\[Unidentified empty ballot box at the Lycee
Daniel\].](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2011/03/urne_vid.jpg)

@vivehaiti: "Urne vid pa idantifye donk poko gen vot nan lise danyel la."
[Unidentified empty ballot box at the Lycee Daniel

[![@samaxyalaat: "Just taping up the electoral lists, lycee petion downtown.
Already an hour behind."](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2011/03/taping.jpg)](http://yfrog.com/h07zmytj)

@samaxyalaat: "Just taping up the electoral lists, lycee petion downtown.
Already an hour behind."

[![New York Times' bureau chief Randol Archibold \(@rcaNYT\): "Voting
materials finally arrive at #Martelly polling place, 2 hrs late, calming
crowd."](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2011/03/arriving.jpg)](http://yfrog.com/gzt02dhj)

New York Times bureau chief Randol Archibold (@rcaNYT): "Voting materials
finally arrive at #Martelly polling place, 2 hrs late, calming crowd."

![@Vladguerre: Members voting center at Lycee de Petion Ville counting the
ballots before start the voting process.](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2011/03/counting.jpg)

@Vladguerre: "Members voting center at Lycee de Petion Ville counting the
ballots before start the voting process."

[![@Vladguerre: "A voter outside the Lycee de Petion Ville asking for opening
the voting center,people wants to vote."](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2011/03/plea_open.jpg)](http://yfrog.com/h3f1zsej)

@Vladguerre: "A voter outside the Lycee de Petion Ville asking for opening the
voting center,people wants to vote."

[![](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2011/03/corail.jpg)](http://yfrog.com/h7bggcej)

@melindayiti: "More security and observers than ppl on voter list in Corail".

[![New York Times bureau chief Randol Archibold: "Other voting sites in #Haiti
were calm while opening late and ballots were being
cast."](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2011/03/calm.jpg)](New York Times bureau chief Randol
Archibold: "Other voting sites in #Haiti were calm while opening late and
ballots were being cast.")

New York Times bureau chief Randol Archibold: "Other voting sites in #Haiti
were calm while opening late and ballots were being cast."

![@mhsaintluc: "Anbyans tansyon devan sant vot Ernts Desir" \[Tense atmosphere
in front of the Ernst Desir voting
centre\].](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2011/03/tensyon.jpg)

@mhsaintluc: "Anbyans tansyon devan sant vot Ernts Desir." [Tense atmosphere
outside the Ernst Desir voting centre

[![@esfaceblack: "HNP \(Haitian Nat'l Police\) proudly
voting."](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2011/03/police.jpg)](http://plixi.com/p/85516294)

@esfaceblack: "HNP (Haitian Nat'l Police) proudly voting."

