The [3rd Edition of the Tve Biomovies](http://tve.org/biomovies "Biomovies
site") 1 minute environmental film competition has begun. Anyone above the age
of 9 with a camera and an idea for a 1 minute video on environmental topics
can participate to win a $300 award to produce their video and then compete to
win a grand prize of $1500 and participation in the UN COP 18 Conference in
November.

[![ Drops of Hope, Winner of 2011
Biomovies](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-content/uploads/2012/07/bimovies-
drops-of-hope-still-375x281.jpg)](http://youtu.be/9dNtnT76dno)

Still from one of the 2011 Biomovies winners, Drops of Hope

To participate, choose one of the [5
categories](http://www.tvebiomovies.org/categories.php "Biomovies categories")
related to environmental awareness such as oceans, recycling, women and
climate change, fresh water, and sustainable living. Using their form, send in
your pitch for what you'd like your 1 minute video to be before September 5,
2012. A jury will select 10 proposals (two from each category) who will then
be able to receive funds to make their one minute film. Those 10 films will
compete for the grand prize, and the one with more views for each category
will win. Full information on how to participate can be found on the [tve
biomovies 2012 guidelines](http://www.tvebiomovies.org/guidelines.php "Tve
Biomovies guidelines"), pitches can be made in Arabic, English, German,
Russian or Spanish.

Last year's winners came from many different places around the globe, all
promoting care of our environment and resources in less than one minute.
Following are three of the winning films.

[_Drops of Hope_ ](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=9dNtnT76dno "Drops of
Hope")from Italy and Tunisia:

[_Recharge_](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=-bvPy0vIsmA "recharge") from
India:

[_The Unsettled Pygmies_](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=k63cV2b5cRg "The
unsettled Pygmies") from Uganda:

[![Tve Biomovies logo](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2012/07/enterbiomovlogo_onwhite-375x169.png)](http://tve.org/biomovies)

