_**This post is part of our special coverage of[Bahrain Protests
2011](https://globalvoicesonline.org/specialcoverage/bahrain-
protests-2011/).**_

On Wednesday March 16th, a day after the King of Bahrain announced a State of
National Security, police forces dispersed protesters from Pearl (Lulu)
Roundabout by tear gas. Military forces were also on the scene in Manama but
it is still unclear if they are Bahrain's National Guard or members of the
Gulf Peninsula's Shield who entered Bahrain on Monday.

YouTube user [hyya999](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ebTu9Z6qRiQ) uploaded
this video showing riot police dispersing the crowds at Pearl Roundabout with
tear gas and dark smoke rising.

This video uploaded by YouTube user
[altan9o](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=VNIFWUg4vlI) shows a man injured by
bullets shot in the leg in the town of Qadam which is in the Northern
Governate a few kilometres from the capital Manama. The YouTube user claims
that the fire was from Saudi forces but this is unclear from the actual video.  
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=VNIFWUg4vlI>

Also in Qadam, this video by YouTube user
[Ahmedaino](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=m3Yp3FOreRA) clearly shows
helicopters and military vehicles around Budaiya (or locally know as
“Burgerland”) roundabout which is a few hundred metres from the entrance of
Qadam village.

<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=m3Yp3FOreRA>

At Razi Health centre, a few hundred metres away from Pearl (Lulu) Roundabout,
YouTube user [ALKOOFIPHOTO](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=TEihLJSWQNs)
manages to shoot some images of military personnel firing bullets.

<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=TEihLJSWQNs>

Another video by YouTube user
[EncryptedReality2](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=z6kDoT56Vqs) surfaced
showing bullets holes damaging a Ministry of Health ambulance.

<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=z6kDoT56Vqs>

On Bahrain national TV, the 3rd statement by the Bahrain Defense Force was
aired (uploaded by
[PureFacts2011](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=UYMYvrtlRkk))

<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=UYMYvrtlRkk>

English translation of statement from Bahrain [news
agency](http://www.bna.bh/portal/en/news/450034):

