**_This post is part of our special coverage[Global Development
2011](https://globalvoicesonline.org/specialcoverage/un-millennium-
development-goals-in-2011/)._**

Hong Kong has been facing a shortage of infant milk powder ever since December
2010, when mainland Chinese customers purchased large amounts of baby milk
formula in Hong Kong and stockpiled it in preparation for the Lunar New Year
break.

Local Hong Kong parents have called for intervention policies from the
government, suggesting a milk powder departure tax to stop smugglers from
carrying it across the border for resale.

[![Both Hong Kong and Chinese parents want safe baby milk formula powder.
Image by Flickr user k.Akagami.](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2011/03/Hong-Kong-and-Chinese-parents-both-want-safe-baby-
milk-formula-375x280.jpg)](http://www.flickr.com/photos/akagami/20635724/)

Both Hong Kong and Chinese parents want safe baby milk formula powder. Image
by Flickr user k.Akagami.

**Scandals and smuggling**

The root cause of the current milk powder shortage can be traced back to the
notorious [melamine-tainted milk
scandal](https://globalvoicesonline.org/specialcoverage/2008-special-
coverage/poisonous-milk-scandal-2008) in 2008. Since then, scandals concerning
milk safety in China have kept emerging from time to time.

Recent examples include the discovery of [elevated hormone levels in infant
milk](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2010/08/17/china-did-powdered-milk-cause-
infant-breast-development) in 2010 and the February 2011 scandal of [cancer-
causing leather chemicals in dairy
products](http://www.theepochtimes.com/n2/china/leather-milk-surfaces-in-
china-51637.html).

In order to protect their babies from poisonous milk, mainland Chinese middle
class parents buy foreign baby milk powder by any means possible. Some even
opt to travel to Hong Kong to purchase infant milk products.

Smugglers are taking advantage of this profit-making opportunity and actively
organize “professional travelers” to hand-carry milk powder across the border
for reselling. Reports have said that some mainland customers will pay an
additional HKD50 (USD6) for each container of milk.

**Reactions from Hong Kong parents**

In the face of the formula shortage, angry Hong Kong parents organized a
petition and called for the introduction of a baby milk powder departure tax
in January 2011. [fionali3721](http://forum.baby-
kingdom.com/viewthread.php?tid=3656157&extra=page%3D2) [zh] is the initiator
of the campaign on the _Baby Kingdom_ forum:

> 自發BK.member聯合要求政府開徵奶粉離境稅，希望引起有關人仕關注。支持者請入來留言。註明（我支持。）
>
> 每名香港離境往中國大陸人仕，只可携帶壹罐，必須已經打開食用過之任何品牌嬰幼兒奶粉
> 。否則嚴格徵收10倍罰則。相信有效打擊水貨分子危害香港穩定。同時嚴厲打擊現時猖狂的走私者。因為他們正在加速令到我們香港之物價提高。造成我們正在香港生活的市民百上加斤。
>
> 以群眾力量，換取BABY權益。

BK [forum] members jointly urge the government to impose a milk powder
departure tax. We also want to arouse public concern on the issue. Supporters
please leave a message and state: [I support]

Each individual departing for Mainland China should only be allowed to bring
one can of infant formula milk powder, and it should already be opened.
Otherwise a fine of ten times [the powder's value] should be charged. We
believe this policy could effectively discourage smugglers and stabilize Hong
Kong’s milk powder supply. The smugglers have caused serious inflation in [the
cost of milk formula] in Hong Kong, adding an extra burden to Hong Kong
people's living expenses.

People power to defend BABIE'S rights.

On the one hand, parents in Hong Kong feel helpless and angry about the milk
shortage, one the other hand, they also sympathise with their mainland Chinese
counterparts who are victims of irresponsible governance.
[XsQsMe](http://www.review33.com/chat/index.php?topic=26110127232532&page=5)
from online forum _Review33_ has commented:

> “我們很同情中國的父母，  
>  但是也擔心由此影響到我們的正常生活。真的很痛
>
>
> 有個咁嘅政權，我都好心痛。千憶攪奧運又得，千憶攪神七神八又得，假蛋、sophone又造到，養多幾隻乳牛生產牛奶就唔得，由得自己國家嘅BB自生自滅，所以第三世界永遠都係第三世界！

We sympathise with the mainland parents, but also worry that our livelihoods
will be affected. It’s a painful dilemma.

It’s extremely sad to live under such a political regime: spending billions on
the Olympic Games and the [Chinese national] space project, producing fake
products from [artificial eggs](http://www.chinahush.com/2009/04/24/how-to-
identify-fake-chicken-eggs/) to the
[SoPhone](http://micgadget.com/10605/2010s-best-iphone-4-knockoff-the-
sophone/) (modeled on the iPhone), while failing to raise enough cows for
milk, leaving its babies to suffer. A Third World Country is always a Third
World Country!

**Mainland parents’ responses**

Since infant milk is a daily necessity, parents from mainland China continue
to share information and strategies on how to purchase safe milk for their
babies. [Green tea Chestnut
Cake](http://www.gzmama.com/thread-2031142-1-1.html) from _Guangzhou Moms_
alerts about a quota in purchasing milk powder in Hong Kong and Macau:

> 今日的报纸新闻都在说啦，香港澳门限购奶粉了，不过说开征奶粉税应该就是不可能的事情，大家还是可以去买奶粉的，不过大家要注意哪里能买多少罐啊！
>
> 听说明治在广州这边也断货了，美赞臣跟美素也有一些断货，不过说是下周美素所有阶段的都会有货啦

Today’s newspapers have reported that both Hong Kong and Macau are imposing
quotas on milk powder purchase! But milk powder tax is not a viable option. So
we can still continue buying milk powder across the border, just to be aware
the quantity!

Heard that the brand Meiji is also out of stock here in Guangzhou, Meadjohnson
and Friso [brands] are in limited supply, hopefully Friso will have new stocks
by next week.

[Wenxi Mom](http://www.gzmama.com/thread-2031142-1-1.html) expresses her
concerns:

> 我们真可怜， 拿着血汗钱想给孩子买点安全的东西还买不到

Poor us, we can't even use our hard earned money to buy safe products for our
children.

The Hong Kong government has promised to stabilize the supply of infant milk
powder, but the conflict between mainland and Hong Kong parents is
intensifying.

Last week, on March 9, 2011, five people – three from the mainland and two
from Hong Kong – were [arrested for fist fighting over milk powder in Hong
Kong](http://hk.news.yahoo.com/article/110309/4/n45s.html) [zh].

**_This post is part of our special coverage[Global Development
2011](https://globalvoicesonline.org/specialcoverage/un-millennium-
development-goals-in-2011/)._**

