_**This post is part of our special coverage[Japan Earthquake
2011](https://globalvoicesonline.org/specialcoverage/japan-earthquake-
tsunami-2011/).**_

A simple search for pictures posted on Twitter can bring up amazing things.

Search the characters “宮城” (Miyagi) and a handful of different pictures come
up from [the prefecture](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Miyagi_Prefecture), one
of the hardest-hit in Japan by the [recent
tsunami](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2011/03/11/japan-tsunami-strikes-
coast-leaves-nothing-in-wake/). Scroll down, and [one
picture](http://twitpic.com/49nx8z) stands out, a blob of brown and blue until
you click it…

[![Picture from Kesennuma](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2011/03/picturefromkesennuma.jpg)](http://twitpic.com/49nx8z)

Picture from Kesennuma, Miyagi Prefecture, Japan, one of the areas hardest hit
by the tsunami.

… to reveal a wasteland. This is what remains of
[Kesennuma](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Kesennuma,_Miyagi), a small town,
once with tens of thousands of inhabitants.

Read the caption, and a story emerges of a person who lived in the city. This
person sent the picture to a friend,
[Cherie](http://twitter.com/#!/CherieSYD), in Sydney, who posted the picture
and email to the Internet. The message reads:

> なんとか家族みな無事でいます。家は半分なくなりました  
>  家の前の風景で家も駅も商店街も何にも無くなりました…

Everyone in my family somehow made it out safe. This is the scene from our
home, which is half gone. Everything in front of our home, the train station,
the shopping area, has all been wiped away…

> 宮城県気仙沼市の被害をネットで配信したいのですが、私には出来ません
> 助けが必要です。出来るだけ色んな国へ知らせたいと思います。このメールも電波が入る所まで車でやっときて打ってます。これから生き残った人達が生きるために少しでも援助お願いします

I want to show the damage to Kesennuma City via the Internet, but I cannot do
anything myself. We need help. I want to send this message around the world,
as much as possible. I drove until I found a signal to send this e-mail.
Please help in any way that you can, to support the lives of all those who
survived.

[Cherie](http://twitter.com/#!/CherieSYD) adds a few words to the end of the
caption:

> I love u,pls dont lose hope.we can meet again, Pray for you.

