**_This post is part of our special coverage on the[Japan Earthquake
2011](https://globalvoicesonline.org/specialcoverage/japan-earthquake-
tsunami-2011/)._**

Following the 9.0-magnitude earthquake that struck Japan on March 11th,
Twitter has seen an outpouring of prayers and information. #prayforjapan and
#Fukushima have become trending topics, and several official
[hashtags](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2011/03/12/japan-hashtags-for-
earthquake-related-tweets/) have been set up to better share regional or
topical updates.

On the downside, there have been numerous online rumors that making the rounds
on Twitter, as well as chain mails. Some spread like wildfire, as idle
curiosity and malicious intent meet with a strong dose of anxiety, exhaustion,
and simple inexperience.

Prolific blogger, editor and critic Chiki Ogiue (荻上チキ) posted a comprehensive
roundup of such online hoaxes about the earthquake
([東北地方太平洋沖地震、ネット上でのデマまとめ](http://d.hatena.ne.jp/seijotcp/20110312/p1)), while
dispersing logical advice on how to improve one’s instinct for sniffing out
falsehoods, and what everyone can do so as not to add to the confusion. Ogiue
is the author of several books about Internet culture.

The following is an excerpted translation of his blog post as of March 13th,
13:00 JST, published with
[permission](http://twitter.com/torakare/status/46766084472311810) from the
author. All links lead to Japanese sources unless otherwise stated.

[![](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2011/03/seijotcp-375x266.png)](http://d.hatena.ne.jp/seijotcp/20110312/p1)

Like the Nikkan Sports article “[Online information exchange is active, but
false rumors also making
rounds](http://www.nikkansports.com/general/news/f-gn-
tp0-20110311-747382.html)” describes, there has been a slew of online hoaxes.
Many people have set up sites to gather useful information, so here I will
list up the actual cases so we know to “be calm when encountering such
information”. I will keep updating this post. Please contact me for
corrections or more information at http://twitter.com/#!/torakare or
seijotcp@gmail.com. Remember, the cases described in this post are only a few
examples of the hoaxes out there.

All right, let me first explain what steps to take when a tweet, blog post, or
e-mail grabs your attention. I'll use Twitter as an example:

