_**This post is part of our special coverage[Japan Earthquake
2011](https://globalvoicesonline.org/specialcoverage/japan-earthquake-
tsunami-2011/).**_

Following the country's [largest earthquake in recorded
history](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2011/03/11/largest-earthquake-in-
recorded-history-in-japan/), Japan is being hit by it's most ferocious
tsunami. People across the country are glued to their TV screens as scenes of
a tsunami measuring more than 7 meters in height sweeping away cars and
buildings flashes across the news. Meanwhile, other parts of the world are
bracing for the worst, with Hawaii ordering an [evacuation of coastal
areas](http://www.reuters.com/article/2011/03/11/uk-japan-quake-tsunami-
hawaii-idUSLNE72A00P20110311) and [warnings issued in at least other 20
countries](http://edition.cnn.com/2011/WORLD/asiapcf/03/11/tsunami.hawaii.japan.warning/).
The Guardian is posting [live
updates](http://www.guardian.co.uk/world/blog/2011/mar/11/japan-earthquake) on
the disaster.

<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=rWgvX1FGK4I>  
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=lSimeWFiuYc>  

A picture of a [giant whirlpool in Ibaraki](http://gakuranman.com/eng/wp-
content/uploads/2011/03/tsunami-whirlpool-550x309.jpg) (via
[@gakuranman](http://gakuranman.com/great-tohoku-earthquake/)):

![](http://i.imgur.com/hbyaG.jpg)

Just a sampling of messages on Twitter.

Tinystar323
[writes](http://twitter.com/#!/tinystar323/statuses/46180249360269312):

>
> 津波は「波」じゃなくて、「コンクリートの壁が猛スピードで突っ込んでくる物」だと思って下さい。人間にどうにか出来る代物じゃないです。絶対に興味本位で見に行ったりしないで下さい。

Please don't think of tsunamis as “waves”, but as “concrete walls which plunge
at extremely high-speed”. Humans are no match for them. Please do not go to
have a look out of curiosity.

An unconfirmed report from
[@nishi_0024](http://twitter.com/#!/nishi_0024/statuses/46180248705957888)
claiming that the Pacifico Yokohama convention center is not accepting people
anymore:

> 【緊急拡散】パシフィコ横浜は津波の危険があるため、受け入れ中止だそうです！

Pacifico Yokohama [convention center] facing tsunami threat, so they stopped
accepting people!

From
[@edamamicky](http://twitter.com/#!/edamamicky/statuses/46179525268221952), a
victim of the tsunami:

> 津波被害あり。自宅2階にて母と弟と近所の男性一名と救助を待っています。怪我はありません。1階は浸水して自力では外に出れません。電話も繋がりません。

Victim of tsunami here. Am at residence 2F with my mother, brother, and a
neighbor waiting for rescue. No injuries. 1F is flooded and we can’t get out
by ourselves. Also phone is not connected.

For up-to-the-minute coverage of the earthquake aftermath, follow NHK's
[official ustream](http://www.ustream.tv/channel/jishinsokuhou).

_**This post is part of our special coverage[Japan Earthquake
2011](https://globalvoicesonline.org/specialcoverage/japan-earthquake-
tsunami-2011/).**_

