_**This post is part of our special coverage[Libya Uprising
2011](https://globalvoicesonline.org/specialcoverage/libya-uprising-2011/) and
[Egypt Protests 2011](https://globalvoicesonline.org/specialcoverage/egypt-
protests-2011/).**_

From a geographical point of view, Libya is right next to the Egyptian western
borders. And from a historical point of view, its on-going revolution seems to
be the one that will succeed right after the Egyptian one in toppling a
decades-old regime. The brutality of Gaddafi and his regime in Libya forced
the Egyptian bloggers, with support from the community, to call for collecting
donations and humanitarian and medical aid and carry them over the border to
the Libyans.

[![Tarek Shalaby in Libya](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2011/03/TarekShalaby_In_Libya-375x250.jpg)](http://www.aliazmy.com/Azmy/My_Albums/Pages/3ashat_Libya_Al_7urra.html)Tarek
Shalaby, on his trip to Libya,

Photo taken by Ali Azmy

Tarek Shalaby shared the details of his trip to Libya on Twitter. He and those
who accompanied him also shared [the
photos](http://www.flickr.com/photos/14875421@N04/sets/72157626050982147/),
and [videos](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=WwmW9dfM0rk) they took during
their trip. It all started when Tarek [announced the plan to go to the city
Salloum](http://twitter.com/tarekshalaby/status/40442555661434881), which is
near the Egyptian borders with Libya, for anyone who'd like to donate or even
join them on February 23. They then announced that they will gather first at
Mostafa Mahmoud mosque in Cairo for people to meet them there.

[![Donations to Libya being collected in
Cairo](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2011/03/Packs2Libya-375x250.jpg)](http://www.aliazmy.com/Azmy/My_Albums/Pages/3ashat_Libya_Al_7urra.html)Donations
to Libya being collected in Cairo.

Photo taken by Ali Azmy

The following day, Tarek tweeted:

@[tarekshalaby](http://twitter.com/tarekshalaby/status/40549051271221249):
Alright everyone, preliminary Game Plan: Meet at Mostafa Mahmoud before 3pm to
collect/pack all donations and take off to
[Salloum](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sallum).
[#Feb17](http://search.twitter.com/search?q=%23Feb17)

@[tarekshalaby](http://twitter.com/tarekshalaby/status/40458397845434368):
Tomorrow's crew heading to Salloum includes [Ali Azmy]
@[Eskalob](http://twitter.com/Eskalob "Ali Azmy") and [Adel Abdel-Ghafar]
@[dooolism](http://twitter.com/dooolism "Adel Abdel Ghafar"). There might be 1
more. Details to follow…

According to [the post Ali Azmy wrote later on in his
blog](http://www.aliazmy.com/Azmy/Blog/Entries/2011/3/3_3ashat_libya_7urra.html),
they succeeded in collecting around 40,000 Egyptian pounds within 24 hours, to
buy medicine with them. Also, later on in Salloum they found at least 25 pick-
ups loaded with medical aid donated by
[Orascom](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Orascom_group) and coordinated by the
Arab Medical Union, and a long line of at least 250 empty micro-buses waiting
to get into Libya to bring the Egyptians there back home.

They then started their trip to Salloum, [about 2 hours late than the
scheduled time](http://twitter.com/tarekshalaby/status/40784840437538816),
they had [some rest in the middle and took some
photos](http://twitter.com/tarekshalaby/status/40806507952082944), then [they
reached El-Alamein
road](http://twitter.com/tarekshalaby/status/40848294846402560) where [they
caught up with the Arab Doctors’ convoy heading the same
direction](http://twitter.com/tarekshalaby/status/40852899642884096). And
finally, [they reached Salloum at 2:00
AM](http://twitter.com/tarekshalaby/status/40925493729558528) on February 25 –
about 10 hours after they started their trip. They reached the border about an
hour later on, but it came out that they [had to spend the night in their
cars](http://twitter.com/tarekshalaby/status/40953605213265920) as they could
not cross the border till the morning.

@[tarekshalaby](http://twitter.com/tarekshalaby/status/40942306844618752): Got
to the border and the military personnel told us that crossing isn't open till
tom morning at 9. Don't know if it will be easy to enter.

In the morning they continued their trip. Ali Azmy [wrote about that part of
the trip till they entered
Libya](http://www.aliazmy.com/Azmy/Blog/Entries/2011/3/3_3ashat_libya_7urra.html),
and how he wishes the borders between the Arab countries remain open in the
future with no need for visas and passports.

We met someone that could help bring the medicine inside to trusted people in
order to be sure would bring it to the most needed places and won’t keep it
stored in some room and sell it later in the black market – which apparently
happens. We went beyond the army checkpoint on the borders with the excuse of
dropping off the medicine and coming back. We successfully convinced him that
we needed 7 people to make the drop off. At that point me, Hassan
[@[htoukhy](http://twitter.com/htoukhy "Hassan El Toukhy ")] and Baroudi
[@[m_baroudi](http://twitter.com/m_baroudi "Mahmoud El Baroudi")] didn’t have
our passports (smart huh! Mainly my fault though) Tarek didn’t have his army
permission,[ luckily 50 pounds and the chaos took care of all
this](http://twitter.com/tarekshalaby/status/41176222528569344). I hope this
will not be the only time for me to pass borders with my ID.

The border was filled with people from different nationalities who were
fleeing Libya. They served as Tarek Shalaby and his friends’ exchange bureau
since they all wanted to get rid of Libyan money and get Egyptian pounds, and
[a Ghanaian called Agogo also sold them a Libyan phone SIM
card](http://twitter.com/tarekshalaby) at the border.

[![Welcoming Jan25 youth in Libya](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2011/03/Welcome_Jan25-375x210.jpg)](http://www.flickr.com/photos/14875421@N04/5489318133/)A
welcoming sign for those entering Libya. It says “Wishing a safe trip to the
youth of January 25 revolutions, in reference to the revolution that took
place in Egypt a month earlier”.

Take from Tarek Shalaby's Flickr account under Creative Commons license

The ride to Libyan city of Tobroq [was
smooth](http://twitter.com/tarekshalaby/status/41178228169244672), the city
[was peaceful](http://twitter.com/tarekshalaby/status/41189526298693632), and
the Libyans were extremely welcoming and generous with them. In fact, the
Libyans generosity seems to be a pan-Arabian attitude to me after [seeing this
video
[Ar]](http://www.facebook.com/video/video.php?v=139086369490687&oid=100781249991787)
of Tunisians offering endless aid to the Egyptians who fled from the western
part of Libya to Tunisia.

@[tarekshalaby](http://twitter.com/tarekshalaby/status/41189285860360192): Not
only did the drivers not accept money for gas nor tips,
@[dooolism](http://twitter.com/dooolism) says the grocery wouldn't take money
for the water & juice.

@[tarekshalaby](http://twitter.com/tarekshalaby/status/41179655604146177): I'm
proud to be an Arab. Very proud.

The plan then was [to stay in
Tobroq](http://twitter.com/tarekshalaby/status/41196492958085120) for the
night and head out to [Benghazi](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Benghazi) the
next day. They stayed in in Hostel called Maseera, [which Tarek described as a
luxurious one](http://twitter.com/tarekshalaby/status/41481501388439552). Once
more, the Libyan owner of the hostel refused to take any money from them.

@[tarekshalaby](http://twitter.com/tarekshalaby/status/41481635899641856):
Even the hotel owners are giving up rooms for free to anyone helping with the
revolution #[Libya](http://twitter.com/search?q=%23libya)

On February 26, the group headed to Benghazi.

@[tarekshalaby](http://twitter.com/tarekshalaby/status/41498079555227648):
Arrived at the main hospital in Ben Ghazi (renamed Martyr's Hospital). To say
we've received a hero's welcome is an understatement.
#[Libya](http://twitter.com/search?q=%23Libya)

The similarities between the different revolutions in Arab world was clearly
seen. Almost the same people demonstrating in similar squares and taking care
of the daily life tasks that were normally done by the regime and its forces.

@[tarekshalaby](http://twitter.com/tarekshalaby/status/41531127629873152):
We're at the equivalent of [Tahrir
Sqaure](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2011/02/04/egypt-inside-tahrir-square/)
in Ben Ghazi. Those who say Arabs are too different to unite are full of shit.

@[tarekshalaby](http://twitter.com/tarekshalaby/status/41532444247068672):
Huge tank with graffiti and loads of kids — just like Tahrir! Sigh. The
beautiful memories! #Jan25 #Feb17

[![Libya: Kids playing on a tank](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2011/03/Kids_on_Tank-375x210.jpg)](http://www.flickr.com/photos/14875421@N04/5489352769/in/set-72157626050982147/)Libyan
kids playing on a tank in one of the squares of Benghazi

Photo taken from Tarek Shalaby's profile under Creative Commons license

@[tarekshalaby](http://twitter.com/tarekshalaby/status/41504432264847361):
Citizens organizing traffic. Haven't seen damage yet, and life seems perfectly
normal…

Ali Azmy wrote about doctors they met there who they have also seen in Egypt
earlier.

In Benghazi they met a doctor who was one of the field doctors in Tahrir and
now she moved to Libya. We met also Dina, a friend of ours that was one of the
field doctors in Tahrir, she has arrived the day before to Benghazi.

Tarek Shalaby and his friends [continued to tour the
city](http://twitter.com/tarekshalaby/status/41833886484799488). They
witnessed the protesters there [celebrating under the
rain](http://twitter.com/tarekshalaby/status/41856430063493120). They also
witnessed [banners being
drawn](http://twitter.com/tarekshalaby/status/41857215182675968), and
[memorials being built for the
martyrs](http://twitter.com/tarekshalaby/status/41856977759899648). Just like
the rest of volunteers there, they all [were waiting for the chance to go to
Tripoli](http://twitter.com/tarekshalaby/status/41844166698737664), but
Tripoli isn't liberated yet and safety is not confirmed. They waited and
waited, but it seemed that it wasn't possible to continue their trip towards
Tripoli.

On February 27, the team headed back home.

@[tarekshalaby](http://twitter.com/tarekshalaby/status/41865217927290880): So
we're heading back to Egypt. Up until the last minute I had hope of going to
Tripoli. Extremely disappointed it's not going to happen.

@[tarekshalaby](http://twitter.com/tarekshalaby/status/41879945563086848):
Driving through a road with trees on either side and green plains leading to a
rainbow. Beautiful Libya

[![Libyans waving their flag by the sea](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2011/03/Libya_Flag_Sea-375x210.jpg)](http://www.flickr.com/photos/14875421@N04/5489357577/in/set-72157626050982147/)Libyans
waving their flag by the coast of Benghazi

Photo taken by Tarek Shalaby under Creative Commons license

On their way back, Ali was busy asking himself, “When is the right time for
intervention and what kind of intervention should it be?”

A lot of the people we met refused international intervention fearing its
consequences, others asking for someone – anyone – to stop these massacres.
But what is our role now? should we pressure for intervention? or send more
medical aid and doctors? I couldn’t decide. Is there a magic number of how
many people should be mass murdered before we intervene? At the same time I
was hearing that each city was training and sending troops to Tripoli to
continue the fight, I hope its a matter of days. But knowing more lives will
be lost until the lunatic is out of power is painful. I guess its inevitable
when people reach the point that the revolution turns into a war for survival
and that people know that they will have to either die fighting for their
freedom from oppressors or live to celebrate this new life. I guess now we
have to respect their will to finish their mission all alone.

He then continued that he might find himself writing more posts about their
trip in the future.

So this is officially my first actual blog post, it was only the timeline of
the events, probably I’ll write another about my opinions on the Libyan
revolution, differences between both revolutions. Hopefully by then the Libyan
people would have gained their whole country back.

Finally, and after seeing [the note written by Muhammad Ghafari
[Ar]](http://www.facebook.com/note.php?note_id=10150113953009670&id=561735835)
about the similar trip he had in support to the Libyans, I believe we have to
be thankful to people like Shalaby, Azmy and Ghafari for sharing their stories
especially with the poor coverage the situation in Libya is receiving in
mainstream media.

_**This post is part of our special coverage[Libya Uprising
2011](https://globalvoicesonline.org/specialcoverage/libya-uprising-2011/) and
[Egypt Protests 2011](https://globalvoicesonline.org/specialcoverage/egypt-
protests-2011/).**_

