_**This post is part of our special coverage of[Bahrain Protests
2011](https://globalvoicesonline.org/specialcoverage/bahrain-
protests-2011/).**_

A number of secondary (high) schools broke out into anti-government protests
across Bahrain on Tuesday March 1. Both boys’ and girls’ schools in Isa Town,
Hamad Town and Jidhafs marched out of their schools in the middle of the
school day in support of protesters c[amping at Pearl (Lulu)
Roundabout](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2011/02/20/bahrain-protesters-
continue-to-camp-at-pearl-roundabout/).

Schools in Isa Town headed towards the Ministry of Education demanding the
resignation of the education minister and venting their anger on the
[volunteer teachers’](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2011/02/21/bahrain-
coming-out-in-numbers-in-search-for-unity/) scheme put in place when teachers
went on strike in support of the Pearl Roundabout protesters and the fallen
martyrs.

> @[mShareeda](http://twitter.com/#!/mShareeda/status/42473763148795904) i got
> them on video <http://yfrog.us/5hc0wz> in Isa Town High School!!!! #bahrain

*Click on hyperlink to view video

This video shows the names of the schools who joined the protest and marched
towards the Ministry of Education gates. Uploaded by YouTube user
[MMulti2](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=i5ALC1Waz9M).

<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=i5ALC1Waz9M>

Students in Hamad Town took to the streets carrying their school bags, calling
for an end to political naturalization of foreign citizens of the right
background, which is particularly evident in the towns where applications for
government housing units have been fast-tracked in order to be given to
nationalized Arabs.

<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=tKiETTBTaFY>  
Uploaded by YouTube user [AloOoOy93](http://www.youtube.com/user/AloOoOy93)

Some tweeps expressed their frustration at the protesting students saying that
they should focus on their studies rather than protesting.

> @[Teema_K](http://twitter.com/#!/Teema_K/status/42508057003032577) What's
> the hell is going on n schools today!! Where's Ministry of education!! Till
> when the ignorance!! These teachers should be punished!

>
> @[Shirley_Riffa](http://twitter.com/#!/Shirley_Riffa/status/42588774508658688)
> It is a teachers responsibility to guide students to live in peace and
> harmony and not to promote division in society

> @[RshRsho](http://twitter.com/#!/RshRsho/status/42546216248147968) “Al Had
> AlZaher” (correct name: Al-Ahd Al-Zaher) students leaving school to protest!
> Who is responsible for this educational crime! #Bahrain http://bit.ly/dSutNB

[![Al-Ahd Al-Zaher Girls Secondary School students marching towards the
Ministry of Education in Isa Town](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2011/03/ahadzaher-375x281.jpg)](http://www.2bb.me/0301-634812989703573645.jpg)

Al-Ahd Al-Zaher Girls Secondary School students marching towards the Ministry
of Education in Isa Town

At the same school, a 17-year old girl was allegedly caught in a fight with a
school nurse. Pro-government website [Peace
Bahrain](http://www.peacebahrain.com/2011/03/assault-on-a-girl/) published
images of the girl's bruises.

[![Bruised nose of a student at Al-Ahd Al-Zaher Secondary Girls School
fighting with the school's nurse who was protesting inside the
school](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2011/03/ahdzaher2.jpg)](http://www.peacebahrain.com/2011/03/assault-
on-a-girl/)

Bruised nose of a student at Al-Ahd Al-Zaher Secondary Girls School fighting
with the school's nurse who was protesting inside the school

  
_Image courtesy of[Peace Bahrain](http://www.peacebahrain.com/2011/03/assault-
on-a-girl/) website_

_**This post is part of our special coverage of[Bahrain Protests
2011](https://globalvoicesonline.org/specialcoverage/bahrain-
protests-2011/).**_

