_**This post is part of our special coverage[Tunisia Revolution
2011](https://globalvoicesonline.org/specialcoverage/2011-special-
coverage/tunisia-uprising-201011/).**_

Tunisians have been expressing their dissatisfaction and anger regarding the
government's poor treatment of those wounded during the Tunisian revolution.
Before President Zine El Abidine Ben Ali was ousted hundreds of people were
wounded in clashes with police, but they have since been neglected. Some of
them have bullets still to be extracted from their bodies, and other had limbs
amputated and are [still
waiting](http://observers.france24.com/content/20120329-wounded-tunisian-
revolution-waiting-treatment-compensation-injured-ennahda-promise-injury-
money-protest-sit-in) for prosthetic limbs. Many have not received the right
medical treatment due to the complexity of their cases.

Prominent blogger and activist [Lina Ben
Mhenni](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lina_Ben_Mhenni) wrote in a blog post
entitled [“The Wounded of the Revolution, Waiting for Something That Won't
Come”](http://atunisiangirl.blogspot.com/2012/04/blog-post_08.html) [ar]:

منذ أكثر من سنة و جرحى الثورة التونسية يعانون من اهمال و لا مبالاة أولئك الذين
توالوا على دفّة الحكم من مسؤولي حكومات مؤقّتة. فتعدّدت المبرّرات و تنوّعت و
كأنّ العلاج و حلّ المشاكل الصحية لمن ضحّوا في سبيل الوطن و يحتمل الانتظار ,
فتذرّعت كلّ حكومة باسباب واهية فمن الحكومات من تعلّلت بأنّها وقتيّة و لا تملك
الصلوحيّات الكاملة لاتخاذ التدابير اللازمة لعلاج هؤلاء الأبطال الذين واجهوا
عنف البوليس و عرّضوا أجسادهم للرصاص الحيّ حالمين بتغيير أحوال البلاد فلجأ بعض
الجرحى الأبطال الى النضال بأجسادهم مرّة أخرى ليضمنوا حقّهم الشرعيّ في العلاج و
هو أبسط ما يمكن أن نقدّمه لهم فدخلوا في اضراب مفتوح عن الطعام قبيل الانتخابات
بفترة قصيرة و ذلك بعد أن طرقوا جميع الأبواب التي أوصدت في وجوهم مرات و مرات.

For more than a year, those wounded in the Tunisian revolution have suffered
from the neglect and indifference of those who came to power, the officials of
the temporary governments. Justifications have varied and multiplied as if
treating and solving the health problems of those who sacrificed themselves
for the nation can wait. Each government has offered flimsy reasons; one of
the governments said it was temporary and didn't have the powers to take the
necessary measures to treat the heroes who faced police violence and exposed
their bodies to live bullets, dreaming of changing the country's situation. So
some of the wounded heroes resorted to fighting, once again using their
bodies, to guarantee their legitimate right for treatment, which is the
simplest thing we can offer them. After knocking on every door, which were
shut in their faces again and again, they [went on an open hunger
strike](http://kissa-online.blogspot.com/2011/10/blog-post_24.html) [ar]
shortly before the elections.

[![Sit-in by families of men wounded during the revolution. Photo from
machhad.com \(CC BY-NC-ND 3.0\).](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2012/04/DSC00077-1024x768-375x281.jpg)](http://www.machhad.com/7477)

Sit-in by families of men wounded during the revolution. Photo from
machhad.com (CC BY-NC-ND 3.0).

[![Tarek Dziri and Muslim Bin Fraj Kasdallah, who threatened to self-immolate
in front of the National Constituent Assembly on April 18, before the
government decided to send them abroad to get more advanced care. Photo from
machhad.com \(CC BY-NC-ND 3.0\).](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2012/04/tarek_moslem-375x281.jpg)](http://www.machhad.com/11678)

Tarek Dziri and Muslim Bin Fraj Kasdallah, who threatened to self-immolate in
front of the National Constituent Assembly on April 18, before the government
decided to send them abroad to get more advanced care. Photo from machhad.com
(CC BY-NC-ND 3.0).

Blogger Hada Ana wrote about one [case](http://hadhaa-
ana.blogspot.com/2011/08/blog-post_26.html) [ar]:

في تونس ما بعد الثورة, يموت جرحى ثورتنا في المستشفيات الغير مجهزة بمعدات قادرة
على شفائهم .  
اليوم في تونس ما بعد الثورة, و بعد صراع دام 8 أشهر قضها مقعد في فراشه و لا يجد
من يتذكره ولا يواسيه في محنته, توفي جريح ثورتنا حسونة بن عمر

In post-revolution Tunisia, the wounded of our revolution die in the hospitals
that don't have the equipment to treat them. Today in post-revolution Tunisia,
after an eight-month fight spent in his bed, with no one to remember him and
sympathize with his agony, Hassouna Ben Omar died.

[![Mohamed Bin Tijani El-Hanchi has a bullet inside his body. Photo from
machhad.com \(CC BY-NC-ND 3.0\).](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2012/04/Mohamed-Bin-Tijani-El-
Hanchi1-375x281.jpg)](http://www.machhad.com/9442)

Mohamed Bin Tijani El-Hanchi has a bullet inside his body. Photo from
machhad.com (CC BY-NC-ND 3.0).

[![](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-content/uploads/2012/04/Rachad-El-
Arbi.jpg)](http://www.machhad.com/9281)

Rashad El-Arbi's parents went on hunger strike before the government took
responsibility for his treatment. Photo from machhad.com (CC BY-NC-ND 3.0).

Yassine Ayari tweeted scathingly about the ruling
[Ennahda](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ennahda_Movement) party:

[@yassayari](http://twitter.com/yassayari/status/191949776491790336): نواب
النهضة بش يداويو جرحى الثورة بالقرأن و النشيد الوطني..

The Ennahda deputies will treat the revolution's wounded with the Qur'an and
the national anthem…

Blogger Abdelkader Hammami mentioned a different side of the
[story](http://best-0f-tunisia.blogspot.com/2012/04/blog-post_5616.html) [ar]:

وتنشر الصفحات القريبة من النهضة معلومات مثيرة لم نقدر على إثبات مصدرها جاء في
بعضها: «من غرائب الثورة التونسية وجود 7 آلاف مطلب فوق مكتب سمير ديلو وزير حقوق
الإنسان يدعي أصحابها أنهم جرحوا خلال الثورة، كثير منهم جرحوا في أحداث عنف لا
علاقة لها بالثورة، ويجب أن تلاحقهم الدولة من أجل التحيل والابتزاز».

[Facebook] pages connected to Ennahda have published interesting information
that we are not able to verify the source of, saying, “One of the
peculiarities of the Tunisian revolution is the presence of seven thousand
applications on the desk of Samir Dilou, Minister of Human Rights. The
claimants say they were injured during the revolution, but many of them were
injured in unrelated violent incidents, and the government should prosecute
them for fraud and extortion.”

The following [video](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=YgLjqDfY7KU) [ar] by
[Melomanx](http://www.youtube.com/user/melomanx) features a sit-in by men
wounded in the revolution in front of the Ministry of Human Rights and
Transitional Justice on March 26, 2012:

This [video](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=LQIfxAFITYc) [ar] from
[TunisiaTalks](http://www.youtube.com/user/tunisiatalks) shows the agony of
the revolution's wounded:

_**This post is part of our special coverage[Tunisia Revolution
2011](https://globalvoicesonline.org/specialcoverage/2011-special-
coverage/tunisia-uprising-201011/).**_

