[![Internet Access](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2011/02/rumor1-375x281.jpg)](http://www.flickr.com/photos/whurleyvision/298441099/)

Internet Access, by whurleyvision

Russian maritime region of [Primorsky
krai](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Primorsky_Krai) seems to be too far (some
8,944 km) from Moscow to notice what is going on in the capital. This is why
Vladivostok, center of Primorie, often has a very different agenda: local news
and traffic jams are more interesting for its netizens than, let's say,
nationalistic riots in the Moscow's center. This is why the detention of a
20-year old Ilya Korol, IT student and an blogger from
[Ussuriysk](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ussuriysk) (satellite of
Vladivostok), became an important event in the regional blogosphere.

On January 26, two days following the [Domodedovo
bombings](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2011/01/24/russia-first-twitter-
reports-of-domodedovo-suicide-bombing/), Korol allegedly (the blog post is
currently not available) wrote in his _Mail.ru_
[microblog](http://blogs.mail.ru/mail/korol-cool/):

> Следующий теракт проведем в Пулково, с тротиллом и шахидками.

We will carry out the next terroristic act in Pulkovo, with TNT and
[shahidki](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Shahidka) (Islamist female suicide
bombers).

The last part of the phrase can be interpreted as a reference to the popular
RuNet meme “[with blackjack and
hookers](http://www.urbandictionary.com/define.php?term=Fine,%20I'm%20gonna%20make%20my%20own%20%3Csomething%3E!%20With%20blackjack...and%20hookers...%20In%20fact,%20forget%20the%20%3Csomething%3E.&defid=371644)”
borrowed from _[Futurama](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Futurama) _cartoon
series, the detail that underscores a black humor intonation of the posting.
Still there's no evidence it was just a joke.

Wherever it was joke or not, police's reaction was straightforward. It took
three days for security services to find Korol and arrest him. News portals
[informed](http://news-russia.info/incident/4214-student-iz-ussurijjska-
obeshhavshijj-vzryv-v-pulkovo-zaderzhan.html) [RUS] that blogger has already
confessed and repented. Moreover, the representative of Pulkovo airport
security [demanded](http://inomnenie.ru/debate/4351/) [RUS] a show trial:

> Очень жаль, что находятся люди, способные на такие жестокие шутки. Судить
> этого шутника надо показательно, освещать во всех СМИ, чтобы другим в
> следующий раз неповадно было

That's a pity that there are people capable of making such cruel jokes. There
should be a show trial over this joker, the trial covered by all the mass
media, so that others won't do the same again.

The crackdown on blogger can be explained by the will of Security Services to
regain the trust from the society and the government after the bombings. After
the suicide bombings, a lot of people raised a question that, despite
increasing financing of security the terroristic acts, keeps repeating.
Netizens pointed out that this security enthusiasm was in need before the
attack. _Nim_ [exclaimed](http://deita.ru/incidents/primorskij-
kraj_31.01.2011_162094_v-primorje-zaderzhali-blogera-soobschivshego-o-
zaminirovanii-aeroporta-pulkovo.html) [RUS]:

> Лучше бы так реальных террористов искали. А то поймали шутника и все: какие
> мы крутые! Где был этот ваш […] “комплекс оперативно- розыскных мероприятий
> с применением специальных технических средств” , когда террористы взрывали
> бомбы в метро, в Домодедово? В Википедии за один только 2010- й года
> перечислено 25 террористических актов. Гже была тогда ваша бдительность,
> уважаемые спецы? Обидно.

You’d better be looking for the real terrorists. Or they caught the joker and
that’s it: we are so cool! Where was this your […] “complex of search
operations with the use of the special technical means” when terrorists bombed
the subway and Domodedovo? Wikipedia listed 25 terrorist attacks in 2010 only.
Where was your vigilance then, dear professionals? It's a shame.

Another blogger _matvienko_vlc_ [pointed
out](http://community.livejournal.com/vladivostok/2851900.html) [RUS] that
“residents simply think that the ‘robust security regime’ is the only
‘necessary measure aimed at preventing terrorist act,’ but in fact these
‘measures’ start only after a ‘call from Ussuriysk’ and do not apply to the
‘robust security regime.'”

Now, Korol is waiting for his prosecution under the Article 207 of the
Criminal Code “Consciously false report of a terrorist act.” Depending on the
verdict, he will either have to pay the fine (about $6,800) or would have to
spend around 200 hours at corrective works. As a maximum penalty, he may be
imprisoned for three years. But it's highly unlikely given the fact that he
confessed.

It is clear that these types of jokes are not appropriate under any
circumstances. Yet there are several questions raised in this regard. Since
Korol didn't advertise it, how did security services found out a short message
in the other hemisphere? Does that mean there's a secret content surveillance
system? Finally, why it took three days for the security services to find the
blogger?

If such content surveillance system exists, it will be reinforced starting
from February 7, 2011. “League of Internet Safety,” as _Radio Free Europe_
[reported](http://www.rferl.org/content/russia_laimches_initiative_to_police_internet/2301671.html)
in a detailed article, “a heavyweight organization … [aiming] to fight against
child pornography and … police other ‘negative” content'” just had its launch.
As an important part of the initiative, Press and Communications Minister
Shchyogolev proposed forming cybersquads (groups of cyber volunteers,
suspiciously reminding [China's “50 cent
party”](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/50_Cent_Party)) that would report
“dangerous” content.

Besides content monitoring, netizens are concerned that this measure will be
used as a tool to silence the oppositional voices. At the same time, some
people are concerned that the budget money dedicated for that project will be
stolen. As blogger _nil_desperadum_ [put
it](http://www.gazeta.ru/business/2011/02/01/3512266.shtml?lj2#comments)
[RUS]:

> Под эгидой борьбы с детской порнографией, что совершенно необходимо, нам
> втюхивают политическую цензуру. […] Призыв на митинг будут трактовать как
> экстремизм. Видимо, испугались скорости сбора протестующих на демонстрации в
> Египте.

Under the auspices of combating child pornography, which is absolutely
necessary, we are being sold a political censorship. […] The call for a
protest will be treated as extremism. Apparently they are frightened by the
speed of the protesters gathered at the demonstrations in Egypt.

Hopefully, Russia will not follow China in its enthusiasm to regulate the
Internet. It seems, however, that Kremlin realized all the power of social
networks and blogging in the process of mass mobilization. Not a surprise, but
the news about the “League of Internet Safety” made Russia netizens feel
neither more secure nor safer in their blogging.

