_**This post is part of our special coverage of[Bahrain Protests
2011](https://globalvoicesonline.org/specialcoverage/bahrain-
protests-2011/).**_

[Nicholas Kristof](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Nicholas_D._Kristof), the _New
York Times_ columnist, and two-time Pulitzer Prize winner, is reporting the
unfolding events taking place in Bahrain via [his Twitter
account](https://twitter.com/nickkristof). Kristof [arrived Bahrain a couple
of days ago](https://twitter.com/NickKristof/status/37556798969876480) when
two protesters were reported dead, after [thousands gathered in Pearl
Square](https://twitter.com/NickKristof/status/37589049237704704) demanding
democracy.

[![Nicholas Kristof, the New York Times columnist, and two-time Pulitzer Prize
winner. Image by Flickr user
caribbeanfreephoto.](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2011/02/Nicholas-
Kristof-375x282.jpg)](http://www.flickr.com/photos/georgiap/1373654483/)

Nicholas Kristof, the New York Times columnist, and two-time Pulitzer Prize
winner. Image by Flickr user caribbeanfreephoto.

Kristof reported early last night (Wednesday 16 February, 2011) that the
square was peaceful:

@[nickkristof](https://twitter.com/NickKristof/status/37971585159667712):
People singing, chanting, dancing around Pearl Roundabout in #Bahrain well
into the night. Trucks delivering donated food.

Then at around 3am Bahrain time on Thursday 17 February, as protesters were
sleeping at Pearl Roundabout, [police troops attacked them with guns, tear gas
and excessive force, without any prior
warning](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2011/02/17/bahrain-police-attack-
sleeping-protesters/). The attack on the protesters came after King Hamad of
Bahrain claimed he regretted the previous use of violence:

@[nickkristof](https://twitter.com/NickKristof/status/38083036637696000): King
Hamad of #Bahrain claimed he regretted violence, then unleashed it on sleeping
protesters. He disgraced himself.

It seems that King Hamad's choice of the timing of the attack and [the barring
of journalists from entering the
Kingdom](https://twitter.com/NickKristof/status/38151431257198592) were meant
to prevent witnesses to the brutality. In the morning, hospitals in Bahrain
[started receiving hundreds of injured protesters due to beatings, shotgun
pellets, and rubber
bullets](https://twitter.com/NickKristof/status/38183960286732288). Kristof
reported the situation in the hospitals:

@[nickkristof](https://twitter.com/NickKristof/status/38184703932506113):
Nurse told me she saw handcuffed prisoner beaten by police, then executed with
gun.

It did not stop at hospitals, as ambulances were targeted too:

@[nickkristof](https://twitter.com/NickKristof/status/38185471372832768): Abt
10 ambulance paramedics attacked by #Bahrain police. I interviewed them, saw
their injuries.

@[nickkristof](https://twitter.com/NickKristof/status/38185826215133185):
#Bahrain govt has ordered ambulances to stop going out, hospital says.

Apparently the Bahrain riot police [reached out to foreign
forces](https://twitter.com/NickKristof/status/38159547642286080) for help:

@[nickkristof](https://twitter.com/NickKristof/status/38186618972143616): 1
#Bahrain ambulance driver told me #Saudi army officer held gun to his head,
said wld kill him if helped injured.

We still do not know the actual number of injured and dead protesters so far.
People in Bahrain are suffering from a very slow Internet connection
currently, and tweets and other updates are one of the only ways to get
information from the country.

**Update:** Internet back up to speed at 17:00 (AST) on Thursday 17 February,
2011.

_**This post is part of our special coverage of[Bahrain Protests
2011](https://globalvoicesonline.org/specialcoverage/bahrain-
protests-2011/).**_

