_**This post is part of our special coverage of[Bahrain Protests
2011](https://globalvoicesonline.org/specialcoverage/bahrain-
protests-2011/).**_

A series of ‘illegal’ protests took place in Bahrain today, February 14, as
demonstrators marked a ‘Day of Wrath’ inspired by popular uprisings in Egypt
and Tunisia. Several videos from the protests have been shared on YouTube
showing how demonstrations were quashed by force. One death has been
confirmed, as well as many injuries.

[Bahrain](https://secure.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/wiki/Bahrain) is a small
island country with approximately [1.2 million
inhabitants](http://www.dailytimes.com.pk/default.asp?page=2011\\02\\08\\story_8-2-2011_pg9_10),
located near the western shores of the Persian Gulf. The country is ruled by a
constitutional monarchy and has a poor human rights record and critically
uneven distribution of wealth.

_smohd92_ shares [this video](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=R3LazFJ0wa4) from
Diraz village, showing riot police charging on a peaceful demonstration and
opening fire as people flee.

A similar scene was repeated in Daih where a peaceful protest is broken up by
police shooting tear gas canisters at close range as demonstrators run.
_Margadoosh_ posted this video:

_mudaif_ shared [this video](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=inHDgMmBnYk) from
a protest in Sanabis. Protesters, including many women, are seen marching down
the street. Later, a group of protesters hide between two buildings, as smoke
rises from what looks like tear gas canisters. Finally, one person shows a
wounded lip, presumably from clashes.

http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=inHDgMmBnYk

A video from Sunday night in Karzakan, shows police confronting a group of
people amidst traffic chaos, before opening fire with rubber bullets on cars
and people, setting off a chorus of honking cars and car alarms, and
eventually screams. This video is censored on the web in Bahrain. Anyone
attempting to view will be met with the block page below.

![Bahrain blocked video](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2011/02/blockpagefeb14-375x186.png)

A block page from February 14

This [video](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=R3LazFJ0wa4), by bh1net, shows a
few seconds of a rally in Maameer, in Sitra:

http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=cFSZ5npJ7-Y

_**This post is part of our special coverage of[Bahrain Protests
2011](https://globalvoicesonline.org/specialcoverage/bahrain-
protests-2011/).**_

