_**This post is part of our special coverage of[Egypt Protests
2011](https://globalvoicesonline.org/specialcoverage/egypt-protests-2011/).**_

Since the news came out that Hosni Mubarak has decided to step down as
president of Egypt, celebrations were carried out across the country.
Throughout the world, people are celebrating in solidarity with the Egyptian
people and their newly recovered freedom. More and more videos are uploaded on
social networks and video sharing websites. Millions of people filmed
different angles of a globally celebrated moment. Here's a tiny sample of the
videos posted online.

[![](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-content/uploads/2011/02/Fullscreen-
capture-13022011-235205.bmp-375x234.jpg)](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2011/02/14/egypt-
freedom-party-continues-videos/fullscreen-capture-13022011-235205-bmp/)

Following the announcement of the resignation of Mubarak, millions flooded
into the streets of Cairo, cheering and hugging each other in joy. This video
posted by [_sweetbabynikki_](http://www.youtube.com/user/sweetbabynikki)
captures these unique moments:

http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=vn7QiqWNF5c

Throughout the world, people have been joining the party.

This video of a rally held in the city of Chicago, USA, was posted by
[_DavidMoskow_](http://www.youtube.com/user/DavidMoskow):

From Geneva in Switzerland, this video by
[_gasoline90_](http://www.youtube.com/user/gasoline90):

Hundreds gathered in Trafalgar Square in central London on Saturday. In this
video, posted by [_20088mmm_](http://www.youtube.com/user/20088mmm) you can
hear marchers chanting “State security where are you? … Facebook has just
fooled you!”:

In the following video, posted by
[_GodBlesstheGrass_](http://www.youtube.com/user/GodBlesstheGrass), Egyptian
Americans hold a rally and make a snow pyramid in front of the Minnesota
Capitol to celebrate the end of the Mubarak dictatorship:

In the Jordanian capital Amman, people celebrated the departure of Mubarak in
front of the Egyptian embassy, as shown in this video posted by
[_nadine89er_](http://www.youtube.com/user/nadine89er):

This other video, posted by
[_TheHolyDamnation_](http://www.youtube.com/user/TheHolyDamnation), shows
people gathering in front of the Egyptian embassy in London, braving the cold
weather, extatically chanting: “Here are the Egyptian people!”

_**This post is part of our special coverage of[Egypt Protests
2011](https://globalvoicesonline.org/specialcoverage/egypt-protests-2011/).**_

