_**This post is part of our special coverage of[Egypt Protests
2011](https://globalvoicesonline.org/specialcoverage/egypt-protests-2011/).**_

**Warning: the videos listed bellow contain images that are graphic in nature.
Viewer discretion is advised.**

On February the 2nd, the Egyptian authorities decided to restore the Internet
after five days of a near-complete shut down of the service. During that
period, which is believed to have cost the country[ tens of millions of
dollars](http://blogs.forbes.com/parmyolson/2011/02/03/how-much-did-five-days-
of-no-internet-cost-egypt/), the government clamped down on journalists and
international media, heavily disrupting cell phone communications and
satellite broadcasting. During the ban, activists succeeded in circumventing
censorship and filtered out hours of videos, filling the gap created by the
media black out.

The content of some of these videos has not been independently verified but
they capture the violence that was occurring on the sidelines of the
“revolution,” away from the peaceful scenes of ordinary traffic in downtown
Cairo and empty streets that the State TV has been broadcasting during the
period of the ban.

The first videos to filter out of Cairo showed a fierce battle over the Kasr
Al Nile Bridge that occurred on the first day of the ban. A sinister pattern
already emerges: the sheer violence with which the regime of Hosni Mubarak is
willing to confront pro-democracy protesters including running over unarmed
demonstrators with anti riot police vans. This video compilation posted by
_[Storyful](http://www.youtube.com/user/storyful)_ covers the scene:

<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=o7d8HGDEGpU>

In this video posted by
_[BlackDeadex](http://www.youtube.com/user/BlackDeadex)_ , a protester is run
over by a fire truck, amid total confusion, as demonstrators were throwing
stones at the police:

This video posted by [_Omar Rashid_](http://www.youtube.com/user/jonashabab)
shows a similar incident when, amid chaos, a driver (allegedly aboard a
diplomatic car) is caught in panic and drives into the crowd:

In this video, a clearly recognizable Egyptian police van runs into a crowd of
peaceful marchers (posted by [_engai_](http://www.youtube.com/user/engai)):

_**This post is part of our special coverage of[Egypt Protests
2011](https://globalvoicesonline.org/specialcoverage/egypt-protests-2011/).**_

