For days, Egyptians have been [searching far and
wide](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2011/01/31/egypt-on-twitter-the-search-
for-wael-ghonim/) for Wael Ghonim, the Google executive who went missing on
January 27. Today, after much
[speculation](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2011/02/07/egypt-wael-ghonim-
released/), Ghonim [was
released](http://online.wsj.com/article/SB10001424052748703507804576130393102422636.html?mod=googlenews_wsj).

Google itself was among the first to [make the
announcement](http://twitter.com/#!/google/status/34676106900541440) on
Twitter:

> Huge relief–Wael Ghonim has been released. Our love to him and his family.

In the few hours since his release, Ghonim has given two interviews. The
first, [tweeted by
@HabibH](http://twitter.com/#!/habibh/status/34710848408657920), is below,
with a translated version available at [Alive in
Egypt](http://egypt.alive.in/2011/02/07/wael-ghonim-is-free-first-
words-%D8%A3%D9%88%D9%84-%D8%AA%D8%B5%D8%B1%D9%8A%D8%AD%D8%A7%D8%AA-%D9%88%D8%A7%D8%A6%D9%84-%D8%BA%D9%86%D9%8A%D9%85/):

The second, for DreamTV, was streamed live and live-tweeted by journalist
[Sultan Al Qassemi](http://twitter.com/#!/SultanAlQassemi), who quickly
translated the interview into English. The following are a few of Ghonim's
statements captured in the tweets:

> Wael @Ghonim: They wanted details, information. “Are the people who planned
> this outsiders?” We didn't do anything wrong, this was an appeal

> Wael @Ghonim: The Egyptian State TV channels didn't portray the truth, that
> is why people watch the private channels now

Al Qassemi concluded his tweeting with [this
statement](http://twitter.com/#!/SultanAlQassemi/status/34721089213038592):

> Wael @Ghonim's last words: I want to tell families who lost their sons this
> is not our fault. This is the fault of those clinging to power.

The interview is also available (in Arabic) on
[YouTube](http://www.youtube.com/user/ostazchetos#p/a/u/0/8Gpzo9016oQ) and has
been transcribed [here](http://www.tweetdeck.com/twitter/exiledsurfer/~Ab8xx).

Egyptians and others on Twitter were captivated by Ghonim's interview, with
many calling him a hero. @EgyptSecularist
[writes](http://twitter.com/#!/EgyptSecularist/status/34721637874008064):

> This is a turning point in the revolution. @Ghonim's emotions will give more
> determination to #tahrir. Tomorrow is going to be tremendous.

@SarraMoneir also [expresses her
appreciation](http://twitter.com/#!/SarraMoneir/status/34722257041367041):

> egypt is crying… i´m drowning in my own tears. GOD BLESS YOU @Ghonim

@CaireneGirl Sherine Elbanhawy also [gives Ghonim
adulation](http://twitter.com/#!/CaireneGirl/status/34722188162506752):

> @Ghonim We are so proud of you.No one blames you. U are a true patriot. We
> love u. Hold your head up high. You have liberated #Egypt #jan25

Cairo-based journalist Ben Wedeman (@bencnn)
[agrees](http://twitter.com/#!/bencnn/status/34721683029884928):

> the wael @ghonim interview on DreamTV: Earthshaking. #Jan25 #Egypt #tahrir

Egyptian journalist @SarahCarr [sees things the same
way](http://twitter.com/#!/Sarahcarr/status/34724889470439424):

> The next time someone doubts the logic of the Tahrir occupation make him
> watch the @ghonim interview #jan25

