**_This post is part of our special coverage of[Egypt Protests
2011](https://globalvoicesonline.org/specialcoverage/egypt-protests-2011/)._**

The world has its attention placed on Egypt, going on its 10th day of protests
against the regime. As Internet connectivity was reestablished, a rise in
twitter updates, image and video uploads was seen, showing what the situation
was like on the Egyptian streets, from Egyptian eyes.

[YouTube's Citizentube ](http://www.citizentube.com/2011/02/egyptian-protest-
footage-on-youtube.html)has begun collectively curating citizen videos, and on
their YouTube page they have a submission form for anyone who finds (or
uploads) citizen media video of the protests to include it [on the
site.](http://www.youtube.com/user/citizentube)

> Raw footage from individuals on the ground offers a visceral window into the
> situation in Egypt, where crowds are gathering to demand President Mubarak's
> resignation.
>
> If you've found videos on YouTube that document what's happening on the
> streets of Egypt's cities, please add the links here.

Here is a [video](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=by3NvrMwups) showing the
activity of Tahrir square from above:

http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=by3NvrMwups

And [this next on](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=cmU39pGh5B8)e shows the
clashes from ground level:

Other tools being used mobile devices which upload directly to the web, like
[Ahmed Naguib](http://about.me/ahmed) is doing with twitter and his [tumblr
account](http://naguib.tumblr.com/). He also uploaded pictures showing the
field hospitals set up for the protesters, like [this
one](http://yfrog.com/h74g4fkj) showing the medical supplies:

[![](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2011/02/hospital1.jpg)](http://yfrog.com/h74g4fkj)  
  

[Medicine and Medical Supplies](http://yfrog.com/h74g4fkj) by [Ahmed
Naguib](http://about.me/ahmed)

  
He's also uploaded short videos that give you the sense of what is going on at
ground level, like this video showing musicians playing in Tahrir Square:

http://qik.com/video/33502537

Or [this next one](http://qik.com/video/33517720) showing protesters chanting
and waving flags at night:

http://qik.com/video/33517720

On Facebook, Ahmad Elhag uploaded a [graphic video showing a Military truck
running over
protesters](https://www.facebook.com/video/video.php?v=501970624666); a
[longer version](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=3wi3K8T3pPQ) can be found on
YouTube:

But not only is the government using trucks to run over protesters: this [next
video ](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=YWvel6Z7qlU)shows how they've also put
horses and camels to do their dirty work, endangering not only the dozens of
people they plow through, but also the animals. After the initial
confrontation, protesters are seen leading off the now riderless animals:

And this next image says it all:  
[![](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2011/02/camel.jpg)](http://twitpic.com/3vwbe6)  
[No Comments!! ](http://twitpic.com/3vwbe6)by
[AmalShawki](http://twitpic.com/photos/AmalShawki)

**_**_This post is part of our special coverage of[Egypt Protests
2011](https://globalvoicesonline.org/specialcoverage/egypt-
protests-2011/)._**_**

