Sudanese students[ chose January 30,
2011](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2011/01/30/sudan-peoples-revolution-in-
the-making/) to be [the beginning of peaceful
demonstrations](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2011/01/31/sudan-tweeting-
sudanjan30/) against President Omar al-Bashir. The main call asking people to
take to the streets of Khartoum was made on
[Facebook](http://www.facebook.com/pages/shbab-lajl-
altghyrshrart/119853051421928). Was this Sudan's first “Facebook Revolution”
with the help of twitter as a side kick?

Social media tools such as blogs, Twitter, Facebook and YouTube played a vital
role in organising and reporting the Jan 30 Sudan peaceful demonstrations. In
this post I will try to highlight some of social media tools that were used to
organise, report and comment on the protests.

Facebook played a vital role as information center and an organising space
while on Twitter users were reporting about the demonstrations in real time.
[Jan30Sudan ](http://jan30sudan.crowdmap.com/main) used [Ushahidi
](http://ushahidi.com/)platform to document the demonstrations on a map.

It seems it all started with a [Facebook
group](http://www.facebook.com/pages/shbab-lajl-
altghyrshrart/119853051421928?ref=nf) leading the role by inviting people to
attend the protests. [The group](http://www.facebook.com/pages/shbab-lajl-
altghyrshrart/119853051421928?ref=nf) is called “>شبــاب لأجـل
الـتـغيـــر·.»شـــرار ة which translates to Youth For change “the Spark”. The
group, which has over 8,000 friends, is credited with helping to organise the
protests. Another Facebook group is “>رصد الاعتقالات و التجاوزات القانونية في
مسيرة 30 يناير السلمية بالخرطوم which translates to [“Records or Updates of
arrest and illegal actions or violence in the 30 of January Peaceful
Demonstration in Khartoum.”](http://www.facebook.com/pages/rsd-alatqalat-w-
altjawzat-alqanwnyt-fy-msyrt-30-ynayr-alslmyt-
balkhrtwm/160363214015531?ref=nf)

[![](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2011/01/171598_131387456928401_100001714420199_185727_5722474_o.jpg)](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2011/01/31/sudan-
facebook-revolution-with-the-help-of-twitter-as-a-side-
kick/171598_131387456928401_100001714420199_185727_5722474_o/)

Protesters in Khartoum, Sudan. Photo courtesy of Ehsasi Gdeed.

On the other side, there are blogs such as
[hurriyatsudan](http://www.hurriyatsudan.com/), which keeps track of news and
updates. The blog has published names of people who have been arrested.
[Jan30Sudan](http://jan30sudan.crowdmap.com/main) website helped people to
track locations of the protests and actions such as arrest or clashes with the
police.

Below are some of incidents that [were captured on the
map](http://irevolution.wordpress.com/2011/01/30/protest-map-of-khartoum/):

> * Police use gas bombs against medical students  
>  * Peaceful gatherings and demonstrations  
>  * Sudanese security harassing foreign journalists  
>  * Picture of police beating protesters on Palace Street  
>  * Videos of protest in Khartoum

[Some](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=IZCHAoiJh_s)
[protesters](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Hj5-Z9EkgTo)
[uploaded](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=GE67vVzctkc)
[videos](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=iT1TQV5uqhk) on the video sharing
site, Youtube.

Twitter updates using the hashtag #SudanJan30 started from the beginning of
the protest from those attending the protests such as
[simsimt](http://www.twitter.com/simsimt) and others who were following the
demonstrations online.

[![](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2011/01/Screenshot_1.jpg)](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2011/01/31/sudan-
facebook-revolution-with-the-help-of-twitter-as-a-side-kick/screenshot_1/)

[![](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2011/01/Screenshot_6.jpg)](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2011/01/31/sudan-
facebook-revolution-with-the-help-of-twitter-as-a-side-kick/screenshot_6/)

[![](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2011/01/Screenshot_2.jpg)](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2011/01/31/sudan-
facebook-revolution-with-the-help-of-twitter-as-a-side-
kick/screenshot_2/)[![](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2011/01/Screenshot_5.jpg)](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2011/01/31/sudan-
facebook-revolution-with-the-help-of-twitter-as-a-side-
kick/screenshot_5/)[![](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2011/01/Screenshot_4.jpg)](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2011/01/31/sudan-
facebook-revolution-with-the-help-of-twitter-as-a-side-
kick/screenshot_4/)[![](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2011/01/Screenshot_3.jpg)](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2011/01/31/sudan-
facebook-revolution-with-the-help-of-twitter-as-a-side-kick/screenshot_3/)

And finally it seems that the spark is still on as activists are planning for
more protests:

[![](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2011/01/Screenshot_7.jpg)](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2011/01/31/sudan-
facebook-revolution-with-the-help-of-twitter-as-a-side-kick/screenshot_7/)

What we are seeing has never before been witnessed in Sudan. Young Sudanese
people are growing up digital, and they are well aware of how the world is
changing around them. The more the digital divide narrows, especially with the
introduction of new fiber-optic sea cables, the more Sudanese youth will
empower themselves via social networking tools to voice their opinions and
state their concerns for the future.

