_This post is part of our special coverage of[Egypt Protests
2011](https://globalvoicesonline.org/specialcoverage/egypt-protests-2011/)._

Demonstrators took to the streets of Cairo and many other Egyptian cities on
Tuesday, January 25 which coincides with a national holiday, “Police Day”, to
protest against the 30-year autocratic rule of President Muhammad Hosni
Mubarak. Emulating the Tunisian protests that led to the toppling of now-
former President Zine El Abidine Ben Ali a couple of weeks ago, protesters
used social networks like Facebook and Twitter to coordinate their actions.
Tonight, news networks speak of tens of thousands of Egyptians camped in the
main Cairo plaza, El-Tahrir Square, and demonstrations are set to continue
Wednesday.

Many observers noted the lack of coverage of the protests by mainstream news
networks. [Aljazeera's coverage in particular was remarkably
sparse](http://lynch.foreignpolicy.com/posts/2011/01/25/watching_egypt_and_lebanon_and_the_pa_and?sms_ss=twitter&at_xt=4d3f2f8f26784678,0).
Citizen journalists have been feeding netizens with loads of videos from
inside the demonstration.

People aggregated by the hundreds in several public squares and gradually
amassed to form large groups of marchers who succeeded in breaking police
cordons as shown by this video posted by
[_lukasjakubicka_](http://www.youtube.com/user/lukasjakubicka):

Protests started peacefully as demonstrated in this video (broken audio)
posted by [_ramzyam_](http://www.youtube.com/user/ramzyam) who comments:

> Very Civilized and protected by the Egyptian Police Forces.

http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=WCvFVJ46P_o

This other video, posted by
[_no2again_](http://www.youtube.com/user/no2again), shows more protesters
peacefully chanting among other slogans: “Down, down with Hosni Mubarak!”,
“State security? State security? We have no state, and no security!”:

Riot police were reportedly deployed in Cairo, the capital city in an apparent
attempt to intimidate protesters as shown in this video posted by
[_motherofthetribe_](http://www.youtube.com/user/motherofthetribe):

Soon news of clashes with riot police started emerging. This video was posted
by [_Midogonpapa_](http://www.youtube.com/user/Midogonpapa):

In the following video, posted by
[_MFMAegy_](http://www.youtube.com/user/MFMAegy), a young man stands in front
of a water cannon armored truck, à la the Tiananmen Square tank-man, barring
it from chasing protesters:

This video, posted by
[_MrPeopleNews_](http://www.youtube.com/user/MrPeopleNews) is reminiscent of
that of Tunisian protesters tearing down portraits of their president:

The same scene is repeated in many neighborhoods in Cairo, as shown in this
video posted by [_Ba7ary_](http://www.youtube.com/user/Ba7ary):

Later in the day, protesters gathered in the main El-Tahrir Square in Cairo,
surrounded by cordons of anti riot police. They chanted “The people want to
bring this regime down” as captured in this video, posted by
[_nadiaharoun_](http://www.youtube.com/user/nadiaharoun1):

Late at night, news arrived of violent clashes between riot police and
protesters who refuse to leave El-Tahrir square.

_This post is part of our special coverage of[Egypt Protests
2011](https://globalvoicesonline.org/specialcoverage/egypt-protests-2011/)._

