_This post is part of our special coverage of[Egypt Protests
2011](https://globalvoicesonline.org/specialcoverage/egypt-protests-2011/)._

What is going to happen in Egypt on January 25? People are calling for
demonstrations and sit-ins everywhere. Who is going to participate, and where?
What are their demands? Isn't it possible that some people are against the
whole thing? We just need to pay the Egyptian blogosphere a quick visit to
find out answers for all our questions.

_Egyptian Wish_ , who lives in the US, [wrote calling people to participate in
the demonstrations and sit-ins that are going to take place in Egypt on
January 25](http://egyptianwish.blogspot.com/2011/01/blog-post_343.html):

يوم 25 يناير بداية إنتفاضة الشعب المصرى  
كن جزء من تجربة يمكن أن تجعل أولادك وأحفادك فخورين بأنك كنت جزء منها ، سنتصدى
للفساد مهما كلف الثمن ، قد لا يكون هذا الحدث هو النهاية ، ولكنه بالتأكيد سيكون
شرارة وبداية للتغيير الحقيقى إن شاء الله.

The Egyptian people's intifada will start on the 25th of January.  
Be part of the experience that might make your children and grandchildren
proud of you some day. We will demonstrate against corruption, no matter how
much this will cost us. This might not be the end, but for sure it will be the
beginning. It will be the spark and the first step of the real change.

Thanks to the events in Tunisia that forced former president Zine El Abidine
Ben Ali to flee the country, as it seems that the Tunisian syndrome is being
spread across the Arab world, and some might consider [Tunisia as the first
tile in the domino effect](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2011/01/16/arab-
world-after-tunisia-whos-next/).

_Egyptian Wish_ continued:

فى تونس نزل الآلاف من المواطنين صامدين مصممين على ضمان حقوقهم وحقوق الأجيال
القادمة وحصلوا على حقوقهم كلها حتى هروب الديكتاتور بن على و مصر مش أقل من
تونس.

In Tunisia, thousands of the Tunisians demonstrated for their rights and those
of the coming generations, and they insisted on their rights until achieved
their goals and forced Ben Ali the dictator to flee the country. The Egyptians
aren't any less brave than the Tunisians.

[![Jan25 Freedom to Egypt](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2011/01/CarlosLatuff_Egypt_Jan25-375x259.gif)](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2011/01/23/egypt-
will-january-25-be-the-day-of-the-egyptian-intifada/carloslatuff_egypt_jan25/)  
The Brazilian cartoonists Carlos Latuff [dedicated](http://twitpic.com/3smpqq)
[many](http://twitpic.com/3smpa6) [of his](http://twitpic.com/3smoln)
[cartoons](http://twitpic.com/3smoq8) to the event.  

Freedom to Egypt, on the 25th of January.

Zeinab Samir, [like many Egyptians, is still not sure what will happen on that
day](http://www.bentmasreya.net/2011/01/blog-post_20.html).

ماكدبش عليك، أنا مش عارفة إيه اللي هيحصل يومها، مش عارفة العيال اللي على فيس
بوك هينزلوا فعلا زي ما بيقولوا وللا لأ.. مش عارفة حتى إذا كان يضحك وللا يبكي
إنها تتسمى “ثورة”.. يعني، من باب إن الثورة دايما بتبقى مفاجأة مش بمعاد

Frankly, I do not know how things will go on that day. I am not sure if those
who are calling on Facebook for people to go out to the streets are going to
demonstrate themselves or not? I am not sure if it a funny thing to call it a
“revolution” or not, since no revolutions are made according to a pre-set
schedule.

Many groups and events are scheduled on Facebook for the demonstrations. More
than 78,000 Egyptians have so far confirmed their participation in [the event
created on “We Are All Khaled Said” group
there](http://www.facebook.com/event.php?eid=115372325200575&index=1).
Zeinobia [wrote here to sum up the participants so
far](http://egyptianchronicles.blogspot.com/2011/01/jan25-is-getting-
serious.html). Even outside Egypt, people are calling for demonstrations in
front of the Egyptian embassies in London and
[Washington](http://www.facebook.com/event.php?eid=176481332388188&notif_t=event_invite).

Zeinobia wrote:

The January 25th protest is getting serious attention more and more. More
Facebook pages and groups are calling for the #25 Jan and more political
groups are going to participate in the huge event “They are about 17 groups”.

But why this specific date? [Zeinobia sees it is a reminder to the Egyptian
people and to the
police](http://egyptianchronicles.blogspot.com/2011/01/will-25th-of-
january-2011be-remarkable.html) that on that day, the police stood with the
Egyptian people against the occupation forces there at that time.

25th of January is the national day of Egyptian Police where we remember how
our police force in “[Ismailia](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Isma%C3%AFlia)”
stood besides the people and the resistance against the British occupation in
a very rare patriotic incident in 1952.

While now, [especially after the murder of “Khaled
Said”](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2010/06/10/egypt-khaled-said-an-
emergency-murder-by-an-emergency-law/), the situation is not the same.

Zeinobia explained:

Now in 2011 [there is a big event organized by “We are all Khaled Said”
group](http://www.facebook.com/event.php?eid=115372325200575&index=1) and
supported by other opposition political parties and groups on that day and
there are huge hopes that this event will change Egypt forever especially
after what happened in Tunisia.

Zeinobia then listed the requests of the callers of the demonstrations.

The group is calling the people to go to the street in order to achieve
certain demands:

