As indicated in the [first post
](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2011/12/13/peru-protests-against-mining-in-
videos-part-i/)of this two-part series, [recent
protests](http://www.arellanojuan.com/tag/conga/) against the environmental
damage caused by mining in Peru have sparked plenty of audiovisual material,
with both campaigns to raise awareness, and citizen videos of protests,
repression and more. This second part shows what citizens, journalists and
organizations in the area have been uploading to the Internet.

The following video from the YouTube account of the Cajamarca Regional
Government shows some of the people opposed to mining with Gregorio Santos,
Regional President of Cajamarca, at Lake El Perol, one of the lakes that would
be affected by the Conga mining project.

It is important to point out that for several days thousands of protesters
[stayed](http://elcomercio.pe/peru/1343359/noticia-mas-dos-mil-pobladores-
cajamarquinos-cuidan-laguna-perol) [es] at that location, camping in defense
of the lakes, in a sort of
‘[Occupy](https://globalvoicesonline.org/specialcoverage/occupy-worldwide/)‘
Cajamarca.

The next video, by RENAMA (Regional Management of Natural Resources and
Environmental Management) Cajamarca, shows Yanacocha gold mine workers at
their jobs and later gathering at the shore of lake El Perol. It includes a
declaration by one of the workers which was apparently recorded in secret.

The ‘Movimiento de Afirmación Social’ (MAS) uploaded this video of one of the
many protests that have been taking place in Cajamarca. This one was held on
November 9, 2011:

This video from November 28, the fifth day of the indefinite strike in defense
of water, was recorded in Cajamarca's main square.

The following video, also by RENAMA Cajamarca, is a compilation of photos of
the protests:

But not everything has been as colorful or quiet. This video shows a wounded
man, and then police and protesters in the hills near the premises of
Yanacocha gold mine:

This one, by Karlos Peralta, seems to be a continuation of the previous video:

This video, by the Yanacocha company, shows a group of protesters in what the
mining company describes as, “the cowardly attack on Yanacocha – Conga project
officials and property. About 250 villagers are seen riding horses
aggressively.”

A video from November 30, shows people, who were wounded in a confrontation
during a protest, arriving at a clinic. We then hear the declarations of a
protester and a policeman, both wounded:

The following video calls for peace in Cajamarca:

This final video, by Dimas Soria, is a call, apparently made from a public
Internet booth in Lima, “to human rights activists, and environmentalists
worldwide. Peru and Cajamarca need you urgently. The Yanacocha company wants
to continue polluting lakes and rivers; the people said ‘no’ to the Conga
project and the Peruvian government sent troops to suppress the people of
Cajamarca, [leaving some of them] severely injured –and the world doesn't
know. “

[http://www.youtube.com/watch?feature=player_embedded&v=tOeVURk1iB0](http://www.youtube.com/watch?feature=player_embedded&v=tOeVURk1iB0)

Post originally published on Juan Arellano's personal blog, [on December 10,
2011 ](http://www.arellanojuan.com/las-protestas-contra-conga-y-la-mineria-en-
videos-ii/)[es].

