**Application Deadline: Friday, February 4, 2011 at 11:59 PM GMT**

It has been more than three years since Rising Voices began with a simple
mandate: to help bring new voices from underrepresented communities to the
global conversation through the use of citizen media. We have been
accomplishing that by providing microgrant funding, as well as technical and
mentoring support to our grantee communities. Ever since the first microgrant
competition was announced in May 2007, we have provided seed funding to 24
projects from around the world to help turn their ideas into reality. The
diversity of these grantee projects has made Rising Voices a unique place on
the web to have a firsthand look at places around the world, such as[
Tamatave, Madagascar](https://rising.globalvoicesonline.org/projects/project-
foko/) and [Ulaanbaatar,
Mongolia](https://rising.globalvoicesonline.org/projects/nomad-green-
mongolia/), through the first-person accounts of these new bloggers.

![risingvoices1.jpg](https://www.globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2007/05/risingvoices.jpg)Beginning on January 11th, 2011,
Rising Voices is launching the latest round of microgrant funding and is now
accepting project proposals from non-governmental organizations (NGOs) or
individuals for funding of **up to $4,000 USD** for digital media outreach
projects around the world. Ideal applicants will present innovative and
detailed proposals to teach citizen media techniques to underrepresented
communities that are poorly positioned to discover and take advantage of tools
like blogging, video-blogging, or podcasting on their own.

### Who is Eligible to Apply

This funding opportunity is open to both NGOs and private individuals.
However, if an NGO does not have experienced citizen media trainers on their
staff, it is extremely important that they seek collaboration with the local
blogging community to find the right trainer(s) with the necessary skills. On
the other hand, it would also be highly beneficial for individual applicants
to partner with an existing NGO from the communities they plan to serve in
order to strengthen the project's impact.

### What Kind of Projects May be Funded

Rising Voices seeks project proposals that share our mission of bringing
voices from new communities, as well as underrepresented language groups to
the online global conversation through the use of citizen media. The projectsâ€™
primary activities should be to provide citizen media training workshops to
the target community, as well as ongoing support and mentoring to the
participants. Please see our roster of
[current](https://rising.globalvoicesonline.org/projects/) and
[alumni](https://rising.globalvoicesonline.org/projects/inactive/) grantee
projects for examples of previously funded projects.

Examples of potential projects include:

  * Distributing flip video cameras to local residents to help map and document environmental issues affecting the area and to propose solutions.
  * Partnering with a local library with a computer lab to train youth how to record and document the history of their local neighborhood by using mp3 recorders to interview local elders.
  * Organizing blogging workshop for local artisans to help them market their work online, but also tell the story and history of their handicrafts.
  * Distributing $10 digital cameras to two different groups in different neighborhoods and create a Flickr group where they interact with each other's photographic perspectives of their city.

### Application Process

Interested applicants should complete the online proposal application form
([link here](http://www.surveymonkey.com/s/risingvoicesmicrogrants)), which
should also include a detailed budget. If you would like to download the
application questions to complete offline in order to upload later, please
download the text document here
([PDF](https://rising.globalvoicesonline.org/files/2011/01/Rising-Voices-
Grant-Application.pdf) format). While we welcome and encourage projects from
all corners of the global, all applications must be completed in English.

##

[****](http://www.surveymonkey.com/s/risingvoicesmicrogrants)

