The day after the Christmas holiday, Bolivian Vice-President Álvaro García
Linera announced that the [government would end state subsidies on gasoline
and
diesel](http://www.laht.com/article.asp?ArticleId=382385&CategoryId=14919).
The main reason for the measure, García Linera explained during a television
address on the morning of the 26th of December, was that the $380 million that
the government spent toward the subsidies had illegally benefited individuals
involved with selling the contraband fuel to neighboring countries where the
price was much higher. To prevent public funds from being used in this manner,
the price of gasoline increased by 73% and the price of diesel increased by
83%

As expected, the announcement caused much concern in the Bolivian population
because of the uncertainty of what effect the increase would have on the cost
of living. Hours after the announcement, long lines could be observed at some
gas stations with drivers hoping to fill up before the price hike took effect.
Drivers like Santiago Terceros (@sterceros) made some calculations that [his
monthly expense for gasoline would increase by US$80
[es]](http://twitter.com/sterceros/statuses/19410567533953024).

[![](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2010/12/longlines-375x281.jpg)](http://twitpic.com/3k3vwn)

Long lines to enter gas station in Santa Cruz on Sunday, December 26. Photo by
Jessica Olivares and used with permission.

But it is the higher expenses for heavy transport that will affect the cost of
daily goods, as Terceros rhetorically asks, “[What things do not need to be
transported?” [es].](http://twitter.com/sterceros/statuses/19395302343577600)
The day following the Sunday announcement, Twitter users began to report on
some of the price increases of goods and services around the country. For
example, Jorge Bueno (@jj_creativos) reported on an increase in the price of
[cement](http://twitter.com/JJ_Creativos/statuses/19445733119762432),
[bread](http://twitter.com/JJ_Creativos/statuses/19441623775580160), and [his
daily lunch](http://twitter.com/JJ_Creativos/statuses/19441230853181440) in
the city of La Paz. Jorge Marco Zárate (@jmarcozarate) even noticed employees
of his local supermarket in Santa Cruz [changing the prices on the products on
the shelves](http://twitter.com/jmarcozarate/status/19403589654941696).

It is also the cost of public transportation that concerns many daily users of
this form of transit. Many of the public transport syndicates met on Monday,
December 27th to determine whether they would enter into a general strike or
raise fares for the passengers. Reyqui of the blog _Bolivia Informe [es]_
provides [an overview of the price increases to take
effect](http://reyquibolivia.blogspot.com/2010/12/los-pasajes-se-disparan-por-
el.html) in the four largest Bolivian cities. The price will increase between
66%-100% in the cities of La Paz, El Alto, Santa Cruz, and Cochabamba.

The availability of public transportation on the day following the
announcement was irregular, as many bus drivers waited to see what the
syndicate leaders would decide. As a result, the Bolivian Armed Forces helped
to provide free transportation to some passengers. Tonny López (@tonnylp) took
this [Twitpic](http://twitpic.com/3k9ugw) of one of these military transport
vehicles in the city of El Alto.

The measure has been called the “gasolinazo” by the media and has been a
popular [hashtag [es]](http://search.twitter.com/search?q=%23gasolinazo) used
by Bolivian Twitter users. The suffix “-azo” added to the end of the word
gasolina (gasoline) conveys the act of a “[strike or
blow](http://www.spanishdict.com/answers/170623/augmentative-suffixes-azo),”
and reflects the feeling that the raise in prices is a blow to the cost of
living.

Some wonder whether such a price increase was the first option, especially
since those involved with contraband were the main culprits. The digital
magazine _La Mala Palabra_ [tweets
[es]](http://twitter.com/LaMalaPalabra/statuses/19409360530702336) that the
Armed Forces should have been called in to tackle the contraband. Better
control at the border may have been a way to prevent subsidized fuel from
being sold in neighboring countries.

García Linera made the announcement in his function as acting President, since
President Evo Morales was in Venezuela delivering aid to flood victims.
However, some thought that it was no coincidence why the Vice-President made
the unpopular announcement. Ivan Terceros (@ivntres)
[wrote](http://twitter.com/ivntres/statuses/19437309829054464):

> Por que Evo no anunció el #gasolinazo ?? fácil, la imagen del Presidente no
> puede caer…

Why didn't Evo announce the #gasolinazo?? That's easy, the President's image
cannot be allowed to go down…

It was also [the timing of the December 26th announcement
[es]](http://twitter.com/jcvelizmorejon/statuses/19416316846804992) that Juan
Carlos Véliz (@jcvelizmorejon) found to be telling:

> El Gobierno lanzó el gasolinazo en un momento en que la población está
> adormilada por las fiestas de fin de año.

The Government launched the gasolinazo at a time when the population was
asleep because of the year-end holidays.

Some agree that the subsidies were unsustainable for the Bolivian economy
including economist Carlos Gustavo Machicado of the blog _Guccio's [es]_ ,
[who applauds the new measure](http://guccios.blogspot.com/2010/12/y-triunfo-
el-mercado.html):

> Y si bien yo soy bastante crítico de lo que hace el gobierno, esta vez debo
> admitir que fue una medida buena, donde triunfo el mercado y aplastó una vez
> más esos discursos de patriotismo barato. Ciertamente no hay nada como el
> poder de los precios y de la libertad económica para frenar el contrabando y
> la especulación y lo que esta medida hará es justamente ordenar el sistema
> de precios y proveer la información correcta que los agentes necesitan
>
> […]
>
> Muchas cosas pueden pasar y las magnitudes dependerán de las expectativas,
> entre ellas esta: Presiones salariales, ajuste de todo el sistema de
> precios, depreciación de la moneda nacional, entre otros. En todo caso lo
> importante es no alarmarse, esto es algo que tenía que suceder y mejor que
> sucedió ahora.

I normally have been a critic of what the government does, but this time, I
must admit that it was a good measure, where the market triumphs and crushes
the rhetoric of cheap patriotism. Certainly there is nothing like the power of
the prices and the economic freedom to halt contraband and price speculation
and what this measure will do is fairly order the price system and provide the
correct information that the agents need

[…]

Many things can happen and the magnitude depends on the expectations, among
these: salary pressures, adjustment of the entire system of prices,
depreciation of the national currency, among others. In any case, what is
important is not to be alarmed, this is something that needed to happen and it
is best that it happened now.

In his blog, former Minister of Hydrocarbons Mauricio Medinaceli [compares the
2010 price increase with similar increases in recent history
[es]](http://www.mmedinaceli.com/index.php?option=com_content&view=article&id=5&Itemid=6):

> Efectivamente, revisando las estadísticas de los últimos 20 años lo que
> sucedió el día domingo 26 de diciembre del año 2010 es históricamente
> notorio. Como se observa, los valores históricos se situaban entre el 8% y
> 35%, lo que vivimos ahora es un ajuste del 73%… sí, 73%.

In fact, reviewing the statistics from the last 20 years, what happened on
Sunday, December 26, 2010 is historically noteworthy. As you can see, the
historical values were located between 8% and 35%, what we are seeing now is
an adjustment of 73%… yes, 73%.

Mabel Lafuente Azad (@la_mabel) writes that [such an increase was “necessary,”
[es]](http://twitter.com/la_mabel/statuses/19401493106917376), but she adds
that “once again the people with low incomes will be the ones who sacrifice
the most.” And that is what many of the protests say that the ordinary citizen
will the one most affected. While some citizens have announced plans for
[citizen street protests](http://www.facebook.com/notes/lamalapalabra-
revist/cacerolazo-hoy-lunes-a-las-800-pm-contra-el-gasolinazo/475352235442),
blogger Mario Durán, who has been following the developments on his blog
_Palabras Libres [es]_ found it odd that some social movements had not reacted
to the price increase. He wonders whether their silence could be explained
because they feel like “[this government is ‘their’
government](http://bolivianueva.blogspot.com/2010/12/gasolinazo-9-adormecimiento-
de-los.html).” However, later in the day, Durán noted that organizations like
the Departmental Worker's Center (COD for its initials in Spanish) and the
Federation of Neighborhood Organizations in the City of El Alto
([FEJUVE](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fejuve) for its initials in Spanish)
[came out in opposition to the decree
[es]](http://bolivianueva.blogspot.com/2010/12/gasolinazo-12-la-reaccion-
tardia-de-los.html). Social movements like these have traditionally been
strong allies of Morales and his administration.

Even though there are plans for an increase in [wages for public sector
workers in February 2011
[es]](http://www.erbol.com.bo/noticia.php?identificador=2147483938743), there
are some employees who do not have a promised raise. Alhen Wiki (@alhen_)
[writes about those who may be left
behind](http://twitter.com/alhen_/statuses/19378598456598528):

> Felices los del transporte pueden doblar sus precios. A mi quién me dobla el
> sueldo?

Those in the transportation sector are happy because they can double their
prices. But, who will double my salary?

