_**This post is part of our special coverage of[Tunisia Revolution
2011](https://globalvoicesonline.org/specialcoverage/tunisia-
uprising-201011/).**_

An unemployed Tunisian set himself on fire in protest against his joblessness,
sparking a [wave of riots
](http://af.reuters.com/article/topNews/idAFJOE6BI06U20101219)on the ground
and solidarity and support on social networking platforms.

While the fate of Mohamed Bouazizi, aged 26, from Sidi Bouzid, in southern
Tunisia, remains unclear, Tunisian netizens ceased the incident to complain
about the lack of jobs, corruption and deteriorating human rights conditions
in their country.

From Facebook to Twitter to blogs, Internet users expressed their solidarity
with Mohamed, who had graduated with Mahdia University a few years ago, but
could not find a job. Being the only breadwinner in his family, he decided to
earn a living and with his family’s help, he started selling fruit and
vegetable from a street stall. His venture gave him very little, enough to
guarantee the dignity of his family. But city hall officials were on the look
out, and have seized his goods several times. He tried to explain to them that
what he was doing was not his choice that he was just trying to survive. Each
time, his goods were confiscated, he was also insulted and asked to leave the
city hall premises. The last time this happened, Mohamed lost all hope in this
life and decided to leave it forever. He poured gasoline on himself and set
himself on fire.

On Facebook, several groups were created to denounce what happened. [_Mr
President, Tunisians are Setting Themselves on
Fire_](http://www.facebook.com/pages/shb-twns-yhrq-fy-rwhw-ya-syadt-
alryys/137969316260836?ref=mf#!/pages/shb-twns-yhrq-fy-rwhw-ya-syadt-
alryys/137969316260836?v=wall) (Ar) is such a group. In less than 24 hours,
the group attracted 2,500 members, and today boasts more than 10,000 fans. In
less than 24 hours, it has also been censored by the authorities, who have
clamped down on the Internet with an iron fist.

Here are two screen images, the second showing what Tunisians see when they
try and access the page:

[![](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2010/12/med-375x178.jpg)](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2010/12/23/tunisia-
unemployed-mans-suicide-attempt-sparks-riots/med-2/).

[![](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2010/12/elyes-375x216.jpg)](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2010/12/23/tunisia-
unemployed-mans-suicide-attempt-sparks-riots/elyes/)

Some bloggers wrote about what happened and expressed their anger. Writing in
a Tunisian dialect, [_Boukachen_](http://boukachen.blogspot.com/2010/12/blog-
post_18.html) wrote a post entitled _The Sidi Bouzid Holocaust_ :

> الحكاية يا جماعة ميش جديدة، عندها سنين حالة المناطق الداخلية ميزيريا تتحد في
> تسليطها على الناس الظروف المناخية و تهميش هالمناطق بكل لامبالاة و فرح دائم و
> طحين مستمر. اما الحكاية ما تاقفش هنا، لأنو الاعلام المنحط متاع بلاد العم
> بوكشان يمارس تعتيم كامل عالحكاية،…

What happened is not something new. This miserable situation has been ongoing
in the remote areas for many years. It is the result of the combination of the
climatic conditions and the marginalization of such areas, coupled by the
total indifference (of the authorities). But the story does not end here as
our depraved media exercises a full blackout of this incident.

[_Tunisian Girl_](http://www.atunisiangirl.blogspot.com/2010/12/sidi-bouzid-
brule.html) added:

> Dernièrement , les immolations par le feu se sont multipliées en Tunisie
> .Les acteurs de ces actions sont généralement des citoyens tunisiens qui ont
> perdu tout espoir en une vie descente . Chômage et pauvreté sont au rendez-
> vous et ont envenimé leur existence.

The Tunisian government did not find another solution but to censor the
websites disseminating the story and imposing a blockade on the city of Sidi
Bouzid, where people are expressing their anger by protesting in the streets.

On Twitter, the furor is also continuing, with the hash tag
[#sidibouzid](https://twitter.com/#!/search?q=%23sidibouzid) trending among
Tunisian users.

_**This post is part of our special coverage of[Tunisia Revolution
2011](https://globalvoicesonline.org/specialcoverage/tunisia-
uprising-201011/).**_

The number one cause for suicide is untreated depression. Depression is
treatable and suicide is preventable. You can get help from confidential
support lines for the suicidal and those in emotional crisis. Please visit
[www.befrienders.org](http://www.befrienders.org/) to find a suicide
prevention helpline in your country.

