[![](https://es.globalvoicesonline.org/wp-content/uploads/2010/12/el-cuatro-
por-ciento-275x300.jpg)](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2010/12/24/dominican-
republic-demanding-4-of-national-budget-for-education/cuba-cyber-citizens/)  
Since November there has been a debate in the Dominican Republic about the
quality of the education. The debate has focused on a significant item
contained in the General Law of Education that refers to an amount of money
that should be invested annually in the education sector. In effect, [Law
66-97](http://www.oas.org/juridico/spanish/mesicic2_repdom_sc_anexo_7_sp.pdf)
[es], in its article 197, establishes that the annual public expense on
education should at least match 4% of the Gross Domestic Product (GDP), but in
reality it has been sometimes less than 2%.

Being the case that the Dominican Republic almost always occupies one of the
[bottom rankings](http://www.blogsantodomingo.com/2007/12/10/republica-
dominicana-es-el-tercero-de-al-con-menor-inversion-en-educacion-salud-y-
asistencia-social/) [es] in studies on the quality of education in Latin
America, a nonprofit organization called [Coalición por una Educación
Digna](http://educaciondigna.com/about/) [es], which means Coalition for a
Worthy Education, has focused on the matter by referring to education as an
investment rather than an expense. The consequence has been that since the
first days of November there have been several protests in various parts of
the country. The first one was in the capital Santo Domingo, where the
President and Congress are based.

The debate, which has been the top story in newspapers, television and radio,
also appeared on the Web 2.0, where signs of support for the 4% GDP commitment
have been seen on blogs and social networks, especially Facebook and Twitter.
Even Dominicans residing in New York and
[Madrid](http://www.nistido.com/2010/12/los-dominicanos-en-madrid-tambien-
exigieron-el-4-para-la-educacion/) [es] have shown their support for the
movement in the understanding that a good education is the foundation for
future development and prosperity. The blog _[Ponte
Nístido](http://www.nistido.com/2010/12/los-dominicanos-en-madrid-tambien-
exigieron-el-4-para-la-educacion/)_ [es] briefly recounts the protests in
Madrid:

> El [movimiento dominicano del 4%](http://www.nistido.com/2010/12/el-4-del-
> pib-en-la-educacion-dominicana/) llego a las tierras madrileñas donde
> dominicanos tambien exigieron al gobierno el 4% a la educacion, lo hicieron
> frente a la [Embajada Dominicana en
> Madrid.](http://www.google.com.ar/url?sa=t&source=web&cd=1&ved=0CBoQFjAA&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.consuladordmadrid.com%2F&ei=pHX9TL6VJcO88gakorDjCg&usg=AFQjCNHIvJ90EgzFY7Uo3B4OZtMAdiW28w&sig2=vZHpaHhKVy0SjPY-
> Fldrxw)

The [Dominican Movement for the 4%](http://www.nistido.com/2010/12/el-4-del-
pib-en-la-educacion-dominicana/) has arrived in the city of Madrid where
Dominicans also demand of their government the 4% for education, making their
demands in front of [the Dominican Embassy in
Madrid.](http://www.google.com.ar/url?sa=t&source=web&cd=1&ved=0CBoQFjAA&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.consuladordmadrid.com%2F&ei=pHX9TL6VJcO88gakorDjCg&usg=AFQjCNHIvJ90EgzFY7Uo3B4OZtMAdiW28w&sig2=vZHpaHhKVy0SjPY-
Fldrxw)

The movement's demand for 4% of GDP for education in reality began much
earlier than November. In September, a video made the rounds on the Internet
that explained the education realities in the Dominican Republic, and compared
the situation in other nations. The video, which was even shown on television,
also presented the correlation between poor education and high levels of
delinquency and poverty. The movement was just building momentum by the end of
October and by the end of November there were large numbers of hats,
umbrellas, shirts and stickers calling for the 4%.

[The color yellow has become the symbol of the campaign, so much that during
December several
](http://www.google.com.ar/url?sa=t&source=web&cd=1&ved=0CBoQFjAA&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.consuladordmadrid.com%2F&ei=pHX9TL6VJcO88gakorDjCg&usg=AFQjCNHIvJ90EgzFY7Uo3B4OZtMAdiW28w&sig2=vZHpaHhKVy0SjPY-
Fldrxw)_[lunes amarillos](http://educaciondigna.com/lunes-amarillo/)_ [es]
(Yellow Mondays) were realized: protests were carried out in front of Congress
and other strategic points to demand the fulfillment of the law with respect
to education. Yellow Mondays began on the 6th. The second week of December,
the Chamber of Representatives held a session to approve the proposed Budget
for 2011, but like on previous occasions it allocated significantly less than
the 4% of the GDP for education. In other words, it wasn't an exception to the
trend of ignoring the 4% mandate. Towards the end of the session, the
representatives of the opposition protested openly in support of the campaign
for the 4%, and the budget was not be approved. It was sent to a special
commission to study if the budget is compliant with the law.

There were very similar events during the second week of December. Since the
2011 Budget items were defined, the government has been consistently saying
that it cannot honor the 4% mandate because it doesn't have enough sources of
funding. Nonetheless, and probably due to the pressure exercised, the
President of the Republic held a meeting to discuss the subject with the
Coalition for a Worthy Education and other sectors of the social and education
spectrum. By the end of the meeting the head of state laid out a plan to
increase the budget item for education to 10 billion Dominican pesos (approx
271 million USD), raising the total amount invested to approximately 2.75%
GDP. In a similar manner this would lead to a gradual increase across several
years. However, the proposals have been rejected by groups demanding the 4%.

The are divided opinions on the 4% campaign. Though it would be best if the
majority of people agreed, [there are those who think that a group of
politicians from the opposition is behind
this](http://www.7dias.com.do/app/article.aspx?id=88446) [es], while several
commentators agree with the President when he says that a good in Education is
much more than money and that proof of this abounds. [The report PISA and the
situation in Great Britain has been
mentioned](http://www.almomento.net/news/135/ARTICLE/75805/2010-12-12.html)
[es] shows that the education investment has increased considerably but its
scholastic performance has continued to be ranked as one of the lowest in
Europe. Others, such as [José Ernesto Devárez
(hijo)](http://ahiequeprende.com/2010/11/24/educacion-el-4-y-leonel-
fernandez/) [es], from the blog Ahiqueprende, acknowledge that the President
is right on this point, but still deplore the current state of education in
the country:

> Sin embargo, en algo sí estoy de acuerdo con el Dr. Fernández: a la hora de
> encarar la problemática de nuestro sistema educativo, el dinero no lo es
> todo. Barnizar con fondos la actual situación sin previamente definir una
> estrategia a seguir sería un error monumental. Sería como buscar extinguir
> un incendio utilizando el personal, los equipos, el camión, y los agentes
> incorrectos. La situación se agrava si no disponemos de un plan definido.
> Esto solo me suena a un potencial despilfarro de dinero…

However, on something, yes, I agree with Dr. Fernández: when we face the
problems of our education system, money isn't a cure-all. Shellacking or
painting over the current situation with more pesos without first defining a
strategy to follow would be a monumental error. It would be like trying to put
out a fire using the wrong people, equipment, trucks and agents. The situation
will worsen if we do not provide ourselves a definite plan. This sounds like
potentially squandering money…

