[![Christmas cookies](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2010/12/xmas_cookies-375x248.jpg)](http://www.flickr.com/photos/photolinda/3100270861/)

Christmas cookies by Photolinda on Flickr (CC-BY-NC)

Christmas means ‘coming home’ to many people – but when that isn’t possible,
preparing a magic meal can be a consolation. Bloggers of many continents have
shared their favorite holiday recipes. With these you can dream yourself back
home or even visit a place you’ve never been to before. Where are you
celebrating Christmas this year, and what are you serving?

Local specialties and secret family recipes for Christmas food are exactly
what you need to create just the right feeling – whether it’s Brazilian
breakfast [_rabanada_](http://www.chow.com/recipes/10859-rabanada-brazilian-
style-french-toast), American [sour creme coffee
cake](http://allrecipes.com//Recipe/sour-cream-coffee-cake-iii/Detail.aspx) or
Bulgarian pastry,
[_banitsa_](http://www.villastresov.com/facilities/banitsa.php).

**_Bon appetite and merry Xmas from Global Voices bloggers who shared
links!_**

**South Africa** – ‘ms_kamini’ blogs on _Deelishuss!_ and shares a recipe for
an [alternative eggnog](http://deelishuss.blogspot.com/2010/12/south-african-
christmas-recipe-part-4.html) that serves good in warm weather.

**Tanzania** – Make a [traditional Pilau
](http://tasteoftanzania.com/blog/2010/01/22/pilau-la-noeli/)with guidance
from Miriam Rose Kinunda on _A Taste of Tanzania_.

**India** – Both picture and text on _Goan Food Recipes_ explain how to make
[Goan sweets specialties](http://www.goanfoodrecipes.com/2009/12/goan-
christmas-sweets-special.html).

**Indonesia** – Indonesian food blog, _Cooking and Baking Laboratory_
encourages beginners to try the [Manado](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Manado)
speciality, [coconut soufflé
Klapertaart](http://cookingbakinglab.blogspot.com/2009/04/klappertaart-
dessert-from-manado.html).

**Azerbaijan** – Christmas is catching up among the youth in
[Baku](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Baku), though not widely celebrated in
Azerbaijan. [Aygun Janmammadova](https://globalvoicesonline.org/author/aygun-
janmammadova/) recommends a [filo
strudel](http://www.bbc.co.uk/food/recipes/filostrudelwithportw_73185) for
mushrooms and cheese lovers and more Azerbaijan cuisine is shared on [_AZ
Cookbook_](http://www.azcookbook.com/layered-rice-pilaff-with-dried-fruits-
chestnuts-parcha-dosheme-plov/).

**Bulgaria** – _Hit the Road Travel Blog_ promotes
[Banitsa](http://road7.blogspot.com/2010/05/banitsa.html) – a popular pastry
with the choice of pumpkin, cheese or spinach stuffing. Other recipes
available in Bulgarian at [_Yellow Kitchen_](http://yellow-
kitchen.blogspot.com/).

**Ukraine** – Try _Veggie Prairie Girl_ Gerda’s version of the [sweet wheat
porridge _kutia_](http://veggieprairiegirl.blogspot.com/2009/11/kutya-wheat-
porridge.html), or challenge yourself with [the twelve-dish Christmas Eve
supper](http://blog.friendseat.com/celebrating-christmas-ukraine/) described
by Yasmin Coles on _Friends Eat_.

**Estonia** – [Red cabbage and beets](http://nami-nami.blogspot.com/) are part
of the holiday season recipes on food-blog _Nami Nami_.

**France** – In [Alsace](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Alsace) the Christmas
cookies, [_bredela_](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bredela), are prepared weeks
in advance and go well with hot chocolate or spicy tea. Find your preferred
version in French blogs [_Plumes
d’Anges_](http://www.plumesdanges.com/2010/12/22/bredele/) or [_La peau
d’ourse_](http://lapeaudourse.blogspot.com/2010/12/si-tu-aimes-les-gouts-
amers-et-les.html).

**Denmark** – The online food community _Friends Eat_ list the best of [Danish
Christmas dishes](http://blog.friendseat.com/celebrating-christmas-denmark/)
and include a video demonstration of the traditional [_Ris à la
mande_](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ris_a_la_mande). _EU Mom_ blog explains
the [traditions surrounding the
food](http://www.eumom.ie/blog/2010/12/16/danish_christmas/).

**Latin America** – The forum _Intermaniacos_ shares [great Latin American
Christmas dishes](http://www.intermaniacos.com/gastronomia/74898.htm):
[_Hallacas_](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hallaca) from Venezuela, Colombian
[_buñuelos con natilla_](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bu%C3%B1uelos), [_vitel
toné_](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Vitello_tonnato) from Argentina, [_tamal
de puerco_](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tamale) from México and Peruvian
[_panetón_](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Panettone).

**Mexico** – Freelance writer Lesley Téllez recommends [_ponche_ , a
traditional Mexican Christmas
punch](http://lesleytellez.wordpress.com/2010/12/13/how-to-make-ponche-the-
traditional-mexican-christmas-punch/).

**Peru** – Learn how to make a Peruvian classic,
[_tamales_](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tamale), with this video of [mom and
daughter cooking duo](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=_uFmQYpWuPs).

**Puerto Rico** – The passionate cook, Elba, shares a complete [YouTube
videography demonstrating Puerto Rican Christmas
dinner](http://elbacooks4u.blogspot.com/2010/12/got-pork.html).

**Trinidad & Tobago** – Sarina Nicole aka. _Trini Gourmet_ finds [Trinidad's
_pastelles_](http://www.trinigourmet.com/index.php/pastelles/) to be the
seasonal delight.

**United States** – Kentucky based Joi's _Get Cooking_ , provides recipes for
both [Christmas cookies and Christmas
doughnuts](http://www.buttermilkpress.com/blog/category/recipes/christmas/christmas-
baking/).

