[Recent riots on Manezhnaya
Square](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2010/12/11/russia-photos-and-videos-of-
soccer-fans-protesting-in-moscow/) next to the Kremlin showed that Russian
soccer fans have become a powerful community who can mobilize thousands very
quickly around an event. Last week, that event was the commemoration of Yegor
Sviridov, a fan of the Moscow soccer club “Spartak” who was murdered in during
a brawl among soccer fans on December 6. The memorial turned riot, and the
crowd attacked people from North Caucasian and Central Asian republics, with
many injured and one
[killed](http://www.newsru.com/russia/15dec2010/mos_murder.html) [RUS]. This
was the third memorial for Sviridov, and all were characterized by their
[xenophobia](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2010/12/12/russia-more-photos-of-
nationalist-riot-near-kremlin/) and dissatisfaction with a system of justice
that failed to prosecute Sviridov's killers.

**Blogosphere documents riots**

[Yegor
Sviridov](http://ru.wikipedia.org/wiki/%D0%A1%D0%B2%D0%B8%D1%80%D0%B8%D0%B4%D0%BE%D0%B2,_%D0%95%D0%B3%D0%BE%D1%80_%D0%9D%D0%B8%D0%BA%D0%BE%D0%BB%D0%B0%D0%B5%D0%B2%D0%B8%D1%87)
[RUS], a member of the fan group “Union”, was murdered according to
[witnesses](http://fratria.ru/news/2010/12/06/dagi_ubili_sedogo/) [RUS]
friendly with him by a group of eight men from the Caucasus. The witnesses
assert that the men approached Sviridov and his friends, and after a short
quarrel began shooting an automatic weapon, robbed them, and fled. One
attacker, named Cherkesov, allegedly shot 12 times, one of which struck
Sviridov in the head. He was quickly caught by the police. Police caught five
other alleged attackers, but released them, reportedly due pressure from their
relatives. RusNovosti provides their
[photos](http://www.rusnovosti.ru/news/123162/).

Earlier this year, a similar case [provoked a peaceful
protest](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2010/12/09/russia-soccer-fans-block-
moscow-streets-in-protest-against-murder/). Yuri Volkov, a member of the fan
group “Fratria” was killed in a street fight. His alleged killers were
released and the case was closed.

The first rally for Sviridov took place on Kronshtadt boulevard in Moscow,
where Sviridov was killed, and [ended up blocking Leningradskiy
prospect](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2010/12/09/russia-soccer-fans-block-
moscow-streets-in-protest-against-murder/), a major thoroughfare. User
_ВАХНОВ_ shot a video of a crowd shouting “Russians, forward” and “Hey, get
the f…k out of here”:

The second rally was peaceful, and held at the same place on the morning of
December 11. Fans came with flowers and later dispersed. Ilya Varlamov (aka
LJ-user _Zyalt_ ) captured the moment:

[![Soccer fans commemorating Yegor
Sviridov](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2010/12/sviridov-375x250.jpg)](http://zyalt.livejournal.com/330917.html)

Soccer fans commemorating Yegor Sviridov, photo by Ilya Varlamov

The third rally, just several hours later, turned into an a mass manifestation
followed by assaults on people with non-Slavic appearance and clashes with
police. User _pakea2_ uploaded a video of the clashes and assaults on single
people with dark complexions:

**Online mobilization**

The riot has undoubtedly been the most discussed topic on RuNet in recent
weeks. Besides the many political and ethnic implications of the riots, an
important question is: how did such a large group of protesters mobilize?

Analysis of the largest soccer fan websites, such as _fratria.ru_ ,
_fanat1k.ru_ , and _spartak.msk.ru_ , using available online data, shows that
all increased in popularity. The figure below reveals that the main
beneficiary was _fanat1k.ru,_ meaning “fanatic”, a website linked to “Spartak”
hooligans.

[![Popularity of the main "Spartak" fan
websites](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2010/12/sviridov_en-375x241.png)](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2010/12/sviridov_en.png)

Popularity of the main "Spartak" fan websites

A forum [message](http://forum.fanat1k.ru/vse-obo-vsem/5560-ocherednoe-
ubiistvo.html) on _fanat1k.ru_ was __ an early source of news about Sviridov's
murder. It gathered almost 1,500 comments and nearly 200 pageviews. The
language of this discussion was plainly racist and seemingly impelled a direct
response rather than a discussion. User _Zoidberg_ was one of the only
commenters [to propose at least investigate the
case](http://forum.fanat1k.ru/newreply.php?do=newreply&p=495982) [RUS]. The
following language comes from a [view responding to
him](http://forum.fanat1k.ru/newreply.php?do=newreply&p=495990):

> Какие на ху_й разбирательства могут быть?! Русский убит чеченцами, этим всё
> сказано!

What f…ng investigations can be made?! A Russian killed by Chechens (the same
user wrote couple of messages prior to this, that Sviridov was killed by
people from Dagestan), what else can be said!

Zoidberg received about 20 comments calling him Russophobic or stupid. Most of
the other 1,500 comments were also laced with hatred and disappointment.

The statistical data of site attendance is important because it reveals that
sites such as _fanat1k.ru_ create environments that incite mass anger.

Commenters shared many links to neo-Nazi websites, suggesting that neo-Nazis
might be behind the memorials. According to site data, however, the most vocal
neo-Nazi websites did not compare to activity on the soccer fan websites.
_Eduard Limonov_ , leader of a radical leftist group, [wrote that at the
Manezh riot](http://limonov-eduard.livejournal.com/100747.html) [RUS], the
most active provocateurs weren't numerous, only about 50.

Various _Vkontakte_ groups were created, many of them closed or invitation-
only, including groups with five- to ten-thousand participants. They
distributed anti-Caucasian posters and slogans. Examples can be found
[here](http://vkontakte.ru/club22138665) [RUS] and
[here](http://vkontakte.ru/club22145516) [RUS]. At the same time, Fratria, one
of the largest fan groups, tried to stop the violence [by denouncing
support](http://fratria.ru/news/2010/12/09/zayavlenie_fratrii_new/) [RUS] for
the memorial at Manezhnaya Square and calling on fans to stay out of the
center of Moscow.

Several bloggers noted that the fan groups are connected to the Kremlin and
often take sides against opposition political groups including an [attack on
environmentalists in summer
2010](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2010/07/23/russia-unknown-people-in-
masks-and-police-attack-environmentalists/). Tacit support from the elite
could explain the mobilization, though more documentation is needed. _Oleg
Kashin_ in his blog [pointed out](http://kashin.livejournal.com/2858130.html)
[RUS] that one of the organizers of the mob was a member of the pro-Kremlin
youth movement “Nashi”. Blogger _palmoliveprotiv_
[noticed](http://palmoliveprotiv.livejournal.com/130086.html) that one of the
provocateurs was a former member of a pro-Kremlin regional movement. User
_anticompromat_
[commented](http://lj.rossia.org/users/anticompromat/1094905.html) that at the
end of the day, the main benificiary of the story was Vladimir Putin, since
the riots showed everyone that Russia needed strong hand and “it was too early
to give Russians full political rights”.

**Conclusions**

In 2008, Floriana Fossato, a renowned scholar of Russian media,
[wrote](http://reutersinstitute.politics.ox.ac.uk/fileadmin/documents/Publications/The_Web_that_Failed.pdf):

> Nationalists simply did not want to seriously popularize their cause, even
> at a time of heightened political awareness and mobilisation, beyond their
> own circles. […] A well-planned internet presence could do much to
> promulgate these views and launch propaganda campaigns across a much broader
> spectrum. But their world remains self-enclosed.

Now, ethno-nationalists have found a way to extend and merge their online and
offline presence. Likewise, a merger between soccer fans and neo-Nazis is a
global trend and exists in Italy, Germany and other countries. Alexander
Tarasov, scholar of Russian nationalism,
[wrote](http://lj.rossia.org/users/anticompromat/1089738.html) [RUS] that the
first steps for this merger in the Russian context began in 2001 and have been
increasing. Economic crisis and recent unsolved murders influence that process
and have contributed to the spreading of nationalist ideas to the online
environment of soccer fans. The result: advocates for justice, responsible
investigation, and legal reform have been drowned out by a simpler, more
vicious, and ultimately dehumanizing rhetoric that neatly pairs with street
violence.

“The leap from the murky online world of soccer fan and neo-Nazi forums that
few outsiders were reading right into the spotlight”, as [Veronika
Khokhlova](https://globalvoicesonline.org/author/neeka/) puts it, has taken
place and is in danger of spreading. A subculture of [mass
fighting](http://fanat1k.ru/flv-1198.php) as a form of entertainment, in which
“Caucasian” is synonymous with enemy, has emerged onto Russia's central
square. Not even Russia's neutered and cowed television channels can ignore
it, or misinterpret the message of its participants.

This post was re-published in Russian by the [Ezhednevniy Zhurnal (Daily
Journal)](http://ej.ru/?a=note&id=10662) as part of a content partnership with
Global Voices’ RuNet Echo.

