Blogs in Oman, as in other countries in the region, are somewhat less popular
than internet forums, but there has been a growth in blogging in [recent
years](http://www.timesofoman.com/innercat.asp?detail=33576). _Global Voices_
has spoken to [Muawiyah Alrawahi](http://www.muawiyah.com/), a young blogger
who has been encouraging Omanis to blog and to create public debate in their
country, with the argument that “the issue we don’t discuss is the issue we
won’t solve”.

[![Muawiyah Alrawahi](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2010/12/muawiya.jpg)](http://www.muawiyah.com/)

Muawiyah Alrawahi. Photo by Jillian C York

**How did you start blogging?**

لعله ستضحك الإجابة، أو سيضحك منها كثيرون، في الحقيقة بدأت التدوين بسبب نصيحة
من صديق، هو القاص وليد النبهاني. كنت أكتب الشعر الفصيح، والقصة القصيرة وتوقفت
لفترة عن الكتابة الأدبية بعدما تغيرت الكثير من الرؤى التي كنت أؤمن بها في
السابق، في فترة الدراسة الجامعية. بدأت أكتب نصوص ساخرة سريعة، وكان الهدف في
البداية هو الكتابة عن المسكوت عنه، لم تكن تجربة البداية جادَّة، كنت أسميها
[مهذونة] وهي كلمة تجمع بين التدوين والهذيان كما يقول الصوت باللغة العربية،
وبعد سنة كاملة تعرضت لمجموعة من الضغوط الاجتماعية التي كادت أن تكون سببا
لتوقفي، ولكن غيرت الموقع، وأرشفت المدونة السابقة وأنشأت مدونة جديدة باسمي
وبدأت أكتبُ فيها ببعض الجدية، بعضها، وليس الكثير منها وحتى هذه اللحظة لا زلت
مستمتعا بالكتابة، تجربة التدوين غيرت حياتي فعلاً، ولكنها كانت جحيما لا يطاق،
جحيم اجتماعي من الصور النمطية التي تمارس دورَها الصعب. لا أحب أن أكون متململا
أو شاكياً، ولكن التجربة لها جوانبها السيئة أيضا.

Perhaps you will laugh at my answer, or many will laugh at it; in truth I
started blogging when a friend, the writer [Walid Al
Nabhani](http://sarnamat.blogspot.com/), suggested I should. I had been
writing poetry and short stories, but I stopped literary writing for a while
after many of my opinions changed, opinions I had held when I was at
university. I began to write quick satirical pieces [for my blog]. My aim at
first was to write about issues that are not discussed; initially it was not
serious. I called it “Muhadhwana” which is a word combining “blogging”
(tadween) and “hallucination” (hadhayan) in Arabic. After a year I was subject
to a lot of social pressure which almost caused me to stop. But I changed the
site; I archived the old blog and started a new one [in my
name](http://www.muawiyah.com/), and I began to write seriously and not so
seriously. Until this moment I am still enjoying writing. The experience of
blogging has truly changed my life, but it has also been an unbearable hell –
a social hell of stereotypes that I’m continuously subject to. I don’t like to
be bored or to complain, but the experience [of blogging] has negative aspects
too.

**Is blogging popular in Oman?**

لا يمكنني أن أقول أن التدوين له تلك الشهرة في عُمان مثل بعض الدول، ولكن للأسف
الشديد بسبب واقع الإعلام المرير والسيء للغاية في بلادنا أصبحت للمواقع
الإلكترونية شهرة كبيرة ومصداقية وجرأة في نقد الواقع الاجتماعي والسياسي
العُماني، ولعل أشهر الأمثلة على ذلك هي سبلة العرب، وسبلة عُمان، ومنتدى الحارة
العُمانية، التي تمثل الإعلام البديل في عُمان. التدوين هُنا له تأثير مختلف، وله
وظيفة تختلف عن التدوين المتعارف عليه، لديك مثلا المدون حمد الغيثي أحد
الطليعيين في التدوين في عُمان ناقش قضايا فكرية ربما لم تكن لتناقشَ من قبل في
الكتابة الإلكترونية، وكذلك مدونة مثل مدونة عبد الله الحراصي التي تناولَ فيها
أشياء مهمة تتناول كسر المألوف في التفكير وتجاوزه، ومدونة مثل مدونة عمار
المعمري التي كان له دور في كشف وثائق تتناول مشكلات حكومية، وكذلك تناول قضايا
كثيرة لها علاقة بالحقوق القانونية للإنسان العُماني. المدونات الآن حاضرة في
المشهد الإعلامي العُماني، وأصبحت محل تساؤل وحديث من قبل الناس، ولعلي ــ مع
ثقتي الشديدة بأن الإعلام مهم للغاية ــ لا أجد المدونات ستقوم بدورِ الإعلام
المؤسسي، ولكنها ستساهم في أن يتجاوز الإعلام المؤسسي تلك الخطوط الموضوعة والتي
يرسمها شخوص من وفي الإعلام لا يريدون له أن يتغير أو أن يتقدم وأن يعبر عن
البلاد وأن يمثلها خير تمثيل.

I cannot say that blogging is as popular in Oman as it is in other countries.
However, unfortunately due to the bitter and terrible reality of media in our
country, forums have become very popular, gained credibility, and have the
courage to criticise the social and political situation in Oman. Perhaps the
best-known examples are [Sablat Al Arab](http://www.omaniay.net/vb/), [Sablat
Oman](http://www.s-oman.net/avb/), and [Al Harah
Forum](http://alharah.net/alharah/) which act as the alternative media in
Oman. Here blogging has a different influence, and it has a function that
differs to conventional blogging. For example you have the blog of Hamad Al
Ghaithi, one of the pioneers of blogging in Oman, discussing ideas that have
perhaps not been discussed online before. Then there is a blog like [Abdulla
Al Harrasi’s](http://harrasi.blogspot.com/) where you can find important
matters that challenge and go beyond familiar ideas. And a blog like [Ammar Al
Mamari](http://omani1970.blogspot.com/) which has played a role in uncovering
documents and deals with government problems, as well many issues relating to
the legal rights of Omanis. Blogs are now present on the Omani media scene,
and have become a place for people to reflect and discuss. Perhaps – with the
great confidence I have that the media is extremely important – I don’t really
believe that blogs will take over the role of traditional media, but they will
contribute to the traditional media crossing these lines that have been placed
by those from and in the media who do not want it to change or progress, nor
to reflect the country or represent it correctly.

**What have you been doing to increase interest in blogging? Why do you feel
it is important?**

جميل أنك سألت هذا السؤال!! حقيقةً كنت من البداية مؤمناً أنَّ أحدا ما عليه أن
يفعلَ ذلك، يفعل ماذا؟ عليه أن يكتب عن المجتمع وأن يجعل من هذه المنطقة العذراء
البكر التي لم تطأها أقلام الكثير من الكتاب، منطقة متحركة قابلة لأن تكون مادة
للكثير من الكتابات. كان دافعي بسيطة للغاية، وهو أنَّ القضية التي لا نتحدث
عنها، هي قضية لن نحلها، لا يمكن أن نحل شيئا ما دام في خانة المسكوت عنه، الفكرة
كانت بسيطة في البداية أنشأت مدونة وقمت بتعيين مجموعة ممن أسميتهم [مخبرين]
وللكلمة قصد واضح كما ترين. كنت أدفع لهؤلاء بطاقات شحن هاتفية، طبعا ما عدا
مخبرة واحدة أصبحت لاحقا أحد أشهر المدونات العُمانيات بعدما قررت إنشاء مدونتها
الخاصَّة. لم تطل هذه التجربة طويلا لأنني استعضت عنها بالأصدقاء الذين تعرفت
عليهم في عالم الأونلاين، وهذا ما جعلني أصل للكثير من المعلومات بسهولة أكثر من
السابق، وهذا ما جعلني أيضا أكتب عددا كبيراً جدا من المقالات التي أشعر أنني
فخور ببعضها. كنت أحاول جاهداً اجتذاب مجموعة من الكتاب عبر المنتديات، وكذلك
الاتصال بعدد من الكتاب وإقناعهم بإنشاء مدونات، ومع الوقت بدأ التدوين يأخذ
دورَه في المسألة، بدأت قضايا تناقشها المدونات تصلُ إلى التلفاز والإذاعة بل
وقامت بعض القنوات العالمية بتغطية بعض نشاطات المدونين.

I’m glad you’ve asked this question! Actually, from the beginning I believed
that someone had to do that – but what exactly? He or she ought to write about
society, and to create from this virgin territory which has not been touched
by the pens of many writers, a dynamic space capable of providing material for
many writers. My motivation was very simple; it was that the issue we don’t
discuss is the issue we won’t solve. It’s impossible to solve something that
is still kept silent about. The idea was simple; in the beginning I started a
blog and appointed a group of what I called “informers” – the meaning of the
word is clear, as you can see. I used to pay for their phone cards. Of course
one informer later became one of the most famous Omani bloggers, after she
decided to start her own blog. This experiment did not last long because I
replaced the informers with friends that I got to know online; this enabled me
to get a lot of information more easily than before, and to write a large
number of posts, some of which I feel quite proud of. I made great efforts to
attract a group of writers via the forums, and also to contact a number of
writers and persuade them to start blogs. With time blogging began to play its
role; issues that were being discussed on blogs started to reach the TV and
radio. Some international TV stations even began to cover some bloggers’
activities.

**Can you tell us about some of your more controversial posts? What kind of
response have you had to them?**

لا أدري ما هو السبب، هل لأنني كائن طويل اللسان، أم لأنني ببساطة أكتب دون أن
أحاول أن أكون مسالما سياسيا، عدة مقالات يمكنني أن أقول أنها سببت ضجة كبيرة
للغاية وصداعا هائلاً لي، المؤسف في المسألة أنني أؤاخذ وكأنني [لا ينبغي أقول]
بينما طرق قضية مسكوت عنها يفتح الباب للجميع، ببساطة عندما أكتب مثلا مقالاً
أنادي فيه بتوسيع قاعدة بيع الكحول في عُمان، فإنني أيضا أفتح الباب لمن يريد منع
الكحول، حتى هذه اللحظة لا يكتبون أنهم ليسوا مع بيع الكحول وأنهم ضده، ولكنهم
ضدي عندما أكتب وجهة نظر في جانب اقتصادي له علاقة بعدالة السوق في عُمان. ردة
الفعل التي تعرضت لها كانت بشكل كبير منها اجتماعية .. إزعاج متواصل وسوء فهم
وتنميط من قبل الأصدقاء قبل الأعداء، وكأنما الكتابة فقط هي بحث عن الشهرة، ولا
يدركون أنَّ الشهرةَ في هذه البلاد ليس شيئا جميلا، ليس شيئا يبحث عنه، بالطبع لا
أنكر هناك عامل تسويقي يجب على كل إعلامي أن يأخذ به، ولكن أن يسوق من أجل
التسويق تبدو الفكرة غبية للغاية. معظم ما أتلقاه من ردود يتمثل في البريد
الإلكتروني، وأتعمد أحيانا نقل بعض المقالات إلى بعض المواقع الشهيرة في عُمان
لكي أستفيد من وجهات النظر ومن طريقة المجادلة التي يتبعها الكتاب الإلكترونيون،
المؤسف طبعا وجود عدد هائل من البشر ممن يهاجمون بأسماء مستعارة، وللأسف الشديد
يحاسبونني على كلام لم أقلْه، يعني يستنبطون من كلامي ما لم أشر إليه، ولا أعتقد
أن هذه الحالة ستزول إلا بعد أن يصلب الإعلام المؤسسي ظهره ويتجه للمجتمع، وأنا
أتحدث عن عُمان في هذا السياق.

I don’t know what the reason is – maybe I’m just a talkative person – but
because I simply write without trying to be politically conciliatory, I can
say that a number of my posts have caused an really big outcry with huge
repercussions for me. The unfortunate thing is that I am blamed as if I am a
(I mustn’t say the word), meanwhile the doors are opened to all into a subject
previously kept silent about. For example, when I write a piece calling for
alcohol to be more widely available in Oman, I am also opening the door to
those who want to ban alcohol – who until that moment were not writing that
they were for or against the selling of alcohol. But they are against me when
I write an economically-based opinion relating to the fairness of the market
in Oman. The reactions I have had to deal with have been largely social…
Constant annoyance, and misunderstanding and stereotyping by friends even
before enemies, as if writing were only a way to seek fame. They don’t know
that fame in this country is not something good, not something to seek. Of
course I don’t deny there is a promotional aspect that every journalist must
pay attention to, but to promote for the sake of promotion seems a really
stupid idea. Most of the reactions I get are through email, and sometimes I
intentionally publish some posts on well-known websites in Oman in order to
benefit from different opinions, and from the methods of debate followed by
some writers on forums. Unfortunately there are many individuals who attack
using pseudonyms, and sadly they attribute to me things I haven’t said; I mean
they infer from my words something I didn’t intend. I don’t think that this
situation will change until the traditional media develops a stronger spine
and pays attention to society. In this context I am talking only about Oman.

