Recent protests against the environmental damage caused by mining in Peru have
sparked plenty of audiovisual material, with both campaigns to raise
awareness, and citizen videos of protests, repression and more. This selection
of videos helps explain the context of this conflict.

Large mining companies are not immune to corruption. The following video tells
the story of how the Newmont Mining Corporation (which runs the
[Yanacocha](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Yanacocha) gold mine) requested the
assistance of the currently imprisoned[ Vladimiro
Montesinos](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Vladimiro_Montesinos) to settle a
court case in their favor, with the support of the United States Department of
State and the CIA. The 2005 FRONTLINE/World documentary, called ‘The Curse of
the Inca Gold’ (La Maldición del oro inca), was produced by The New York Times
journalist Lowell Bergman.

The story continues in this next video, which goes back to the time of the
Spanish conquest to tell the story of
[Atahualpa](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Atahualpa), the Inca who offered the
Spanish a room full of gold, precisely in
[Cajamarca](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cajamarca), in exchange for his
freedom; the Spanish killed him after obtaining the gold. The video also shows
the [Choropampa](http://icarusfilms.com/new2003/cho.html) case, where a
mercury spill affected the population, and the [Cerro
Quilish](http://www.earthworksaction.org/media/detail/newmont_urged_to_drop_plans_for_gold_mine_in_cerro_quilish_peru)
case, which caused a conflict between the people and Yanacocha.

The documentary ends briefly in a [third
part](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=YGm-krMz9E8).

Although the current problem in Cajamarca also involves Yanacocha, it is about
a different project from those described in the previous videos. [The
conflict](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2011/12/07/peru-blogs-from-cajamarca-
report-on-conga-mine-conflict/) revolves around the Conga mining project,
which threatens to destroy various lakes on the high planes of Cajamarca. A
group of Cajamarca civil society organizations produced the video ‘No to
Conga’ (Conga no va), which describes the problems the ecological and
hydrological systems there face.

The video ‘Lament of a people without water’ (Lamento de un Pueblo sin AGUA)
documents the beginning of the protests of the people of Cajamarca a month
ago, and President Ollanta Humala's change in position, from his pro-water
stance during the campaign, to his recent proposal of “gold and water.”

An example of what happens to a lake that is used by a mining company is
evident in this video showing the Totoracocha lake dried up by the Yanacocha
mine:

Yanacocha has its own vision on the issue of water, as seen in this
institutional video:

[http://www.youtube.com/watch?feature=player_embedded&v=9SpQs0DKcus](http://www.youtube.com/watch?feature=player_embedded&v=9SpQs0DKcus)

The following video is the first part of a documentary entitled ‘The Price of
Gold: Human Rights Violations in the vicinity of the mine Yanacocha,
Cajamarca, Peru,’ by Ralph Weihermann.

The two remaining parts of the documentary are available
[here](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=jYKYWcA-Y_o) [es] and
[here](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=iDv9Eu06u-o) [es].

Another documentary, with a similar name, ‘Choropampa, the Price of Gold’,
illustrates the problem of mercury pollution in the town of Choropampa that
happened 11 years ago.

<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=dW7zn0SbrV4>

The upcoming second post in this two-part series will focus on citizen videos
of the protests.

Post originally published on Juan Arellano's personal blog on [December 7,
2011](http://www.arellanojuan.com/las-protestas-contra-conga-y-la-mineria-en-
videos-i/) [es].

Featured and thumbnail image shows bird's eye view of Yanacocha mine, Peru.
Image by Flickr user
[elmorsa](http://www.flickr.com/photos/elmorsa/562982196/) (CC BY-NC-SA 2.0).

