This autumn, a debate on whether the Internet cures or harms democracy is a
hot topic—and not only in the United States. While in the US context “cyber-
pessimists” seem to [be more
vocal](http://neteffect.foreignpolicy.com/posts/2010/04/29/im_back_but_the_internet_still_sucks)
than “cyber-optimists,” the situation is Russia is reversed, at least for the
time being. Aside from the usual debate on the negatives and positives of
technology's impact on activism, there's something more happening around the
notion of “cyber-optimism.”

[![](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2010/11/we_can2-256x300.jpg)](http://www.flickr.com/photos/notionscapital/2493066577/)

**Direct Internet Democracy – new term, old meaning**

Russian politicians, for their own reasons, have joined the “cyber-optimist”
side. Alexey Chadaev, leading ideologist of the ruling party, “United Russia,”
has proposed the continuation of Dmitry Medvedev's thesis on “[direct Internet
democracy](http://vz.ru/politics/2010/9/10/431634.html),” in a program
document [RUS] called “[Direct Internet Democracy as an Instrument for
Modernization.](http://www.liberty.ru/Themes/Pryamaya-internet-demokratiya-
kak-instrument-modernizacii)“

According to Chadaev, Internet Democracy, “the next step of evolution of
democratic institutions”, is “a means to re-formulate the question of
democracy once again, to point out the key problems of any democratic
structure, to understand what dangers the mass digitilization of
communications brings, and what perspectives are possible for the
democratization of the mass politics, including by the radical reorganization
of such traditional institutions like parties.”

“Internet democracy” is the successor to such Kremlin-produced terms as
“[managed
democracy](http://www.carnegieendowment.org/events/index.cfm?fa=eventDetail&id=819)”
(proposed in 2005), and “[sovereign
democracy](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sovereign_democracy)” (proposed in
2006). Both terms were used to justify the ongoing processes of strengthening
the authoritarian/hybrid regime in the country. Chadaev proposes electronic
voting for the next Duma election in 2011, electronic evaluation of officials’
performance, as well as battling the digital divide, the development of open
software, VOIP services and de-monopolization of online products. None of the
initiatives he proposes, however, provide for the creation of sustainable
political institutions for citizens.

Even before Chadaev's document was released on November 17, 2010, Luke
Allnutt, in a _Christian Science Monitor_ Op-Ed entitled “[Russia's “Youtube
democracy” is a
Sham](http://www.csmonitor.com/Commentary/Opinion/2010/1105/Russia-s-YouTube-
democracy-is-a-sham)”, explained the idea behind the Russian government's
excitement about “Internet democracy” _._

According to Allnutt, the Kremlin was “using the Internet to create a parody
of a real political process.” Russian officials were using online tools like
Twitter to demonstrate they were close to the people on a personal level,
while at the same time avoiding real political change. NGOs and journalists
are harassed and threatened, but at least everyone can blog about it. Internet
activism, Allnutt writes, is permitted by authoritarian regimes like Russia as
long as it serves as a “pressure valve for the opposition to let off steam.”

Mikhail Men, the governmor of the Ivanovo region and a prolific Twitter user
([@mikhail_menn](http://twitter.com/mikhail_menn)), could not have offered a
better illustration of Allnutt's point than during the [recent RuNet Award
ceremony](http://www.vesti.ru/videos?vid=308768&cid=1) [RUS]:

> I sincerely try to communicate as much with the inhabitants of my region and
> with Twitterers from other regions all over the country. And I consider it
> an absolutely normal dialogue, a normal communication.

**Digital Civil Society – an emerging environment**

The idea of the positive role of technology, however, shouldn't be dismissed,
especially in the Russian context. Despite the government ideologists’ efforts
to sell the idea of preserving of the hybrid regime by introducing
superficial—though hi-tech—innovations, the Internet provides a new
environment that no one, not even the government, can fully control. Below are
several reasons to believe the digital environment can still be a game-changer
in Russia.

**Civic activism**

Anrdei Loshak, a prominent Russian journalist, made this point in his Op-Ed
“[[We] Will Survive Without a
State](http://www.openspace.ru/society/projects/201/details/18512/)” [RUS]
(English version [here](http://www.opendemocracy.net/andrei-loshak/parallel-
worlds-how-connected-russians-now-live-without-state)): “Our main cause for
optimism is for the moment in the virtual space of the blogosphere”. Loshak's
argument is that self-organization and mutual support, empowered by the
Internet, represent a new strategy for engaged citizens (aside from the two
“traditional” strategies: emigration and street protest).

> The internet has long since become a parallel reality that has everything so
> lacking in ordinary life: freedom of expression, lack of window dressing or
> propaganda, the possibility of civic engagement..

Thus far, online civic activism has been limited to the re-posting of
sensational stories about injustice. But re-posting, Loshak argues, is an
essential first step indicating that a person is no longer indifferent. The
energy born of dissatisfaction and a sense of injustice accumulates, and
become a real power in the fight against injustice.

In a number of articles dedicated to the volunteer movement that arose around
the management of this summer's Russian wildfires, Gregory Asmolov has
[shown](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2010/08/30/russia-online-cooperation-
as-an-alternative-for-government/) how a civic structure can yield a
independent, networked community that can not only carry out social functions
efficiently, but also, if needed, [take a political
stand](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2010/09/08/russia-bloggers-clash-with-
the-ruling-party/).

**An investigative journalism tool**

Global Voices has been covering the role of the blogosphere in investigating a
number of corruption scandals (e.g.
[here](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2010/08/24/russia-livejournal-
communities-as-a-transparency-tool/) and
[here](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2010/10/25/russia-online-activism-
success-stories/)). The Russian blogosphere, however, brings up new examples
every month. On November 16, 2010, Alexey Navalny, the most outspoken Russian
investigative blogger (read a GV interview with Navalny
[here](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2010/10/27/russia-blogger-alexey-
navalny-on-fighting-regime/)), is the best example of an individual who,
empowered by the Internet, is making a change. His recent post about a
[corruption case in Trasnneft, the Russian oil pipeline
company](http://www.themoscowtimes.com/mobile/article/423619.html), created a
sensation on the Russian Internet (RuNet) and attracted the attention of more
than 1 million readers, including some top Russian officials. Navalny
[found](http://navalny.livejournal.com/526563.html) [RUS], verified and
released documents confirming the theft of 4 billion dollars in the
construction of the [ESPO
pipeline](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Eastern_Siberia_%E2%80%93_Pacific_Ocean_oil_pipeline).
In his post, Navalny encouraged readers to re-post his findings and write to
the government demanding an investigation. His materials were re-posted by
thousands of users on Facebook, LiveJournal and Vkontakte, making the story
available to a much wider audience.

**An alternative source of information**

Miriam Elder at _GlobalPost_ [points
out](http://www.globalpost.com/dispatch/russia/101119/russian-press-freedom-
internet?page=0,0) that, unlike TV and print media, the Internet is the only
source of information free of state regulation and control. Elder presents two
examples of new types of mass media based on online content. One of them,
[Dozhd](http://slon.ru/tvrain/), an online TV station, offers an alternative
news agenda. The creators use three slogans which attempt to restore viewers’
trust in television as a medium: “TV is not our profession”; “Give TV another
chance”; and “Don’t be scared to turn on the TV.” The web portal
_[besttoday.ru](http://besttoday.ru/), _headed by Marina Litvinovich, a
popular Russian blogger and an activist, represents another example of
alternative media in Russia. It aggregates exclusively information from blogs.

Elder quotes Zoya Svetova, a Russian journalist and a blogger, who compares
the Russian Internet to [samizdat](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Samizdat), the
Soviet-era underground literature movement, due to the fact that it is “self-
produced and distributed.” Unlike samizdat, however, the Internet has a much
greater reach and influence.

**A growing audience**

It is worth noting that the speed with which Internet penetration is
increasing in Russia among the [highest in the
world](http://2010.russianinternetweek.ru/get/54979/540/). Over the Putin-
Medvedev period, television lost its credibility as a reliable source of
information. According to an
[article](http://rumetrika.rambler.ru/review/0/4566) [RUS] by _Rumetrika,_
over the past year the audience for the leading Russian television channels
has decreased, whereas the number of Internet users has increased
significantly, with the main websites enjoying [the same level of popularity
as major TV channels](http://2010.russianinternetweek.ru/get/14649/540/). And
it is not only the young people who prefer the Internet over other forms of
media: the older generation is starting to use it on a daily basis as well.

Not every Internet investigation and online campaign ends in success, and
there is much room for improvement. Yet Russian authorities cannot ignore the
moves of civil society online and are _forced_ to respond to online critique.

**Conclusion**

We can witness how the RuNet becomes an arena for competition between at least
two concepts relating to the use of cyberspace: “United Russia”‘s spurious
formulation, “Internet instead of democracy”, and the independent, grass-roots
idea of the Internet as a free environment. So far, both models appear to have
equal chances of success. The final outcome, however, will depend on the
blogosphere's ability to fulfill its role and mission. As Maxim Trudolyubov in
his _Vedomosti_ Op-Ed
[notes](http://www.vedomosti.ru/newspaper/article/250728/setevaya_vlast)
[RUS]:

> Internet allows to imitate activism. And that's what, I'm sure, structures
> like “United Russia” will do […] They will not and they can not achieve the
> main thing – institutional change. Such change is not granted – it is won.

_The post was prepared in collaboration with[Masha
Egupova](https://globalvoicesonline.org/author/maria-egupova/)._

