_**This post is part of our special coverage[Languages and the
Internet](https://globalvoicesonline.org/specialcoverage/languages-and-the-
internet/).**_

On November 28, 1975, Timor Leste unilaterally proclaimed its independence,
after nearly four centuries of [Portuguese
colonization](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Portuguese_Timor). Though the
declaration was read in Portuguese, only a few days after, Indonesia invaded
the country and the use of that same language would be forbidden for the
twenty four years that the
[occupation](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Indonesian_occupation_of_East_Timor)
lasted (1975-1999).

When East Timor became an
[independent](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/History_of_East_Timor#Towards_independence)
country in 2002, both the Tetum and Portuguese languages were chosen as
official for the newborn country. Nevertheless, the number of [national
languages](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Languages_of_East_Timor) is up to 16,
and dozens of other dialects are used on a daily basis by Timorese citizens.

**Idiom(s) of identity**

[![Hau nia lian, hau nia rain \(My language my homeland\). Photo by Sapo
Noticias Timor Leste \(public domain\).](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2011/11/timor-hau-nia-lian-hau-nia-
rai1-375x249.jpg)](http://fotos.sapo.tl/saponoticiastl/fotos/?uid=eKwQ9C5OMhaZjTBGlKuy&aid=27)

Hau nia lian, hau nia rain (My language my homeland). Photo by Sapo Noticias
Timor Leste (public domain).

In practice, [Tetum](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tetum), the lingua franca of
East Timor, is the most widely spoken throughout the territory. On the other
hand, “Portuguese is not the language of unity, but it is the language of
identity”, said [Mari Alkatiri](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mari_Alkatiri),
the leader of Fretilin (the opposition party), in an
[article](http://ciberduvidas.sapo.pt/articles.php?rid=1178) [pt] from 2007 by
the Portuguese journalist Paulo Moura, republished on the blog Ciberdúvidas da
Língua Portuguesa (Cyberdoubts of Portuguese Language).

Moura further explains why after the independence there is an “overwhelming
majority of the population” that does not speak Portuguese:

> Aprendeu bahasa Indonésia e inglês como segunda língua e fala tétum em casa,
> além de alguma outra língua timorense, como o fataluco ou o baiqueno. É a
> chamada geração “Tim-Tim”, do nome Timor-Timur, que os indonésios davam à
> sua 27.ª província. Muitos estudaram na Indonésia ou na Austrália, e é
> difícil explicar-lhes, hoje, a importância do português. Pior ainda, como
> vêem que as elites políticas, privilegiadas, falam português, e como lhes é
> vedado o acesso aos empregos na administração pública, por não falarem a
> língua agora oficial, estes jovens criaram alguma hostilidade em relação a
> Portugal e à língua portuguesa.

They learned Bahasa Indonesia and English as second languages and they speak
Tetum at home, besides any other Timorese language, as Fataluku or Baikeno. It
is the so-called “Tim-Tim” generation, from the name Timor-Timur, that
Indonesians called their 27th province. Many have studied in Indonesia or in
Australia, and it is difficult to explain to them, nowadays, the importance of
Portuguese. Even worse, as they see that the privileged political elites speak
Portuguese, and as their access to employment in the public administration is
barred because they don't speak the now official language, these youngsters
have developed some hostility towards Portugal and Portuguese language.

The World Bank's 2011 report on the progress of the country over the last
decade [illustrates](http://whatismatt.com/world-bank-admits-timor-leste-
faults/) that “Portuguese was spoken by only 5 percent of the population” and
[adds](http://www.nytimes.com/2011/04/22/world/asia/22iht-timor22.html) that
“by 2009, more than 70 percent of students tested at the end of the first
grade could not read a single word of a simple text in Portuguese. This is a
dismal record after 10 years of efforts (…). A full cohort of the population
may be functionally illiterate.”

**Online documentation of languages**

According to the UNESCO [Atlas of the World's Languages in
Danger](http://www.unesco.org/culture/languages-atlas/index.php), there are
six Timorese languages threatened by extinction.

[![Languages of East Timor. Map from the website Fataluku Language
Project.](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-content/uploads/2011/11/timor-
languages.jpeg)](http://www.fataluku.com/languages/)

Languages of East Timor. Map from the website Fataluku Language Project.

In the scale provided, [Adabe](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Adabe_language)
(from the island of Atauro), Habu (from the Manatuto district), and Kairiu-
Midiki and Naueti (from the Viqueque district), are considered vulnerable, as
“most children from the areas speak the language, but it may be restricted to
certain domains”, such as home and traditional life.

One level above is [Waima'a](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Waima%27a_language),
considered critically endangered – “children no longer learn the language as
mother tongue in the home”. On the northeast tip of the island,
[Maku'a](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Maku%27a_language) language, which
according to the Atlas had only 50 speakers in 1981, is critically endangered
and it may even have become extinct. There has had only been [one
booklet](http://www.fataluku.com/makuva/) ever published in this language.

Some of the [languages of East
Timor](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Languages_of_East_Timor) however have been
making their way into new media and online platforms, which may support their
continuity.

Such is the case of [Fataluku](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fataluku), a
Papuan language spoken by 35,000 people in the eastern most district of Timor,
which has been quite well documented on the websites [Fataluku Language
Project](http://www.fataluku.com/) and [Fataluku
Community](http://www.fataluku.org/). A group of young artists from the region
of Lospalos have been using it in their musical and performative works:

A research project for language documentation from the University of Hawai,
has promoted several Timorese languages with the help of exchange students
such as [Osoroa](http://www.ling.hawaii.edu/%7Euhdoc/makasae_osor/index.html)
and [Fatumaka](http://ling.lll.hawaii.edu/~uhdoc/makasae_fatum/) dialects of
[Makasae](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Makasae_language) – the “major language
in the eastern part of Timor-Leste” – as well as
[Waima'a](http://www.ling.hawaii.edu/%7Euhdoc/waima%27a/homepage.html),
[Fataluku](http://www.ling.hawaii.edu/%7Euhdoc/fataluku/),
[Mambae](http://ling.lll.hawaii.edu/%7Euhdoc/mambae/Mambae%20Language.htm) and
[Tokodede](http://www.ling.hawaii.edu/~uhdoc/tokodede/). The latter has been
occasionally used by the Portuguese linguist and translator João Paulo
Esperança on his blog [Hanoin Oin-oin](http://jpesperanca.blogspot.com/)
(Diverse thoughts) [tet].

[![An East Timorese girl speaking \(from clockwise\) Bunak, Tetum, Fataluku
and Portuguese. Translation: "In Bunak/Tetum/Fataluku/Portuguese, we say: I am
in Dili. I have some money. I do not have any money." Image by Joao Paulo
Esperança \(public domain\).](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2011/11/799px-
Línguas_timorenses-375x281.jpg)](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/File:L%C3%ADnguas_timorenses.JPG)

An East Timorese girl speaking (from clockwise) Bunak, Tetum, Fataluku and
Portuguese. Translation: "In Bunak/Tetum/Fataluku/Portuguese, we say: I am in
Dili. I have some money. I do not have any money." Image by Joao Paulo
Esperança (public domain).

Another blogger in under-represented languages is Abe Barreto Soares, who was
[interviewed](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2009/08/28/east-timor-abe-
barreto-soares-poetry-for-nation-building/) for Global Voices in 2009, and
besides writing in [English](http://dadolin.blogspot.com/),
[Tetum](http://lianainlorosae.blogspot.com/), and [Bahasa
Indonesia](http://dadolinlorosae.blogspot.com/), has also kept a poetry blog
in the [Galole laguage](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Galole_language) from the
Manatuto district called [Limusan](http://limusan.blogspot.com/).

A bit further to the South, Idaté language is featured on the [blog of
Ildefonso Pereira](http://ildefonso-pereira.blogspot.com/). Facebook has also
been used for communicating in Timorese languages, as for instance this group
in
[Naueti.](https://www.facebook.com/group.php?gid=117898998231256&v=wall&viewas=0)

Last year a [proposal](http://pt.scribd.com/doc/59602853/National-Languages-
of-Timor-Leste-Conference-2010-Report) was made to use mother tongues first in
the national educational program, as this short film entitled Lian Inan
(Mother Tongue) [tet] points out, highlighting “the importance of a child's
first language in helping them to learn to read and write, to respect the
culture of their parents and community, and to become fluent earlier in the
official languages of Timor-Leste”:

_Rising Voices – the outreach project of Global Voices – is hosting an[online
dialogue](http://newtactics.org/en/dialogue/using-citizen-media-tools-promote-
under-represented-languages) called “[Using Citizen Media Tools to Promote
Under-Represented
Languages](https://rising.globalvoicesonline.org/blog/2011/10/17/using-
citizen-media-tools-to-promote-under-represented-languages/)” together with
New Tactics and Indigenous Tweets. All practitioners from Timor Leste who are
venturing into the world of citizen media to promote online communication
using under-represented languages are welcome to share their strategies,
successes and challenges in the online forum._

_**This post is part of our special coverage[Languages and the
Internet](https://globalvoicesonline.org/specialcoverage/languages-and-the-
internet/).**_

