Over the last five years, more than 40 RuNet bloggers have become targets of
hacker attacks, most of which were carried out by a group of hackers named
_The Brigade of Hell_. The hackers’ targets have been both political and
commercial bloggers. After defacing and deleting content of their victims,
hackers have received no punishment. Moreover, it's been recognized that the
group receives orders from high-ranking government officials when employed to
attack political bloggers.

_The Brigade of Hell_ , a territorially-dispersed network consisting of nearly
20 bloggers and IT-specialists, is headed by a Germany-based hacker who calls
himself _Hell_ (also known as _Helloween_ , _Torquemada_ , _Hacker Hell_ , or
_Great Hacker Hell_ ). According to [Vladimir
Pribylovski](http://enc.tfode.com/Vladimir_Pribylovski) [EN], a renowned
dissident, historian, political analyst, and the main investigator of hacker
attacks on bloggers, the group is coordinated by [Timofei
Shevyakov](http://www.peoples.ru/state/citizen/timofey_shevyakov/) [RUS], a
lead analyst of the pro-Kremlin resource _politonline.ru_ and a former
employee of the _[Foundation for Effective
Politics](http://www.esiweb.org/index.php?lang=en&id=281&story_ID=26&slide_ID=7)_
[EN], the main pro-Kremlin political think tank.

[![Screenshot of the site "Virtual
Inquisition"](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2010/06/virtual-
inquisition-375x191.png)](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2010/06/virtual-inquisition.png)

A screenshot of the site "Virtual Inquisition", the main medium of hacker
'Hell'.

The first attacks began at the end of 2005 and were initially carried out by
_Hell_ and another highly-skilled hacker, Kazakhstan-based [Yuri
Makhno](http://lj.rossia.org/users/about_maxho/1124.html) [RUS] (also known as
_maxho_mactep_ , _mactep_maxho_ ). The first hacker attacks were performed in
two steps. First, a hacker would get access to the blog (most of the hacked
accounts were based on LiveJournal), deface it, and delete the content. Then,
another hacker would contact the victim offering help in restoring access to
the blog in order to gain the victim's trust. Everything would happen within
several hours of the hacking action, so the blogging platform's technical
support had little or no time to intervene. After the initial attacks,
LiveJournal started to make backups for all the blogs it hosted.

As the Russian election period was approaching (the parliamentary election in
December 2007, the presidential election in March 2008), the activity of the
hacker group rose exponentially. Eighteen of the 43 known hacker attacks took
place during 2007. Both liberal and conservative political bloggers were
attacked (including a nationalist politician [Viktor
Alksnis](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Viktor_Alksnis) [EN], as well as a
number of websites of the liberal “[
_Yabloko_](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Yabloko)” [EN] party). At the same
time, journalists and investigative bloggers were attacked (e.g., a top-
ranking blogger [Andrei
Malgin](http://ru.wikipedia.org/wiki/%D0%9C%D0%B0%D0%BB%D1%8C%D0%B3%D0%B8%D0%BD,_%D0%90%D0%BD%D0%B4%D1%80%D0%B5%D0%B9_%D0%92%D0%B8%D0%BA%D1%82%D0%BE%D1%80%D0%BE%D0%B2%D0%B8%D1%87)
[RUS], or Yelena Tokareva, executive editor of the online tabloid
_stringer.ru_ ). A full list of hacked accounts with dates of the attacks and
background on the _Brigade of Hell_ is available
[here](http://www.anticompromat.org/gopniki/hell&brigada.html) [RUS].

Another case, when a hacker attack was used for a political reason, was the
Russian-Georgian war of August 2008. The blog of [Oleg
Panfilov](http://ru.wikipedia.org/wiki/%D0%9F%D0%B0%D0%BD%D1%84%D0%B8%D0%BB%D0%BE%D0%B2,_%D0%9E%D0%BB%D0%B5%D0%B3_%D0%92%D0%B0%D0%BB%D0%B5%D0%BD%D1%82%D0%B8%D0%BD%D0%BE%D0%B2%D0%B8%D1%87)
[RUS], a Russian journalist who took the Georgian side in the conflict, was
hacked two weeks after the start of the war. Later, Panfilov himself had to
move to Georgia due to personal security reasons: he had received several
threats of physical reprisal.

The blog of [Vladimir
Varfolomeev](http://ru.wikipedia.org/wiki/%D0%92%D0%B0%D1%80%D1%84%D0%BE%D0%BB%D0%BE%D0%BC%D0%B5%D0%B5%D0%B2,_%D0%92%D0%BB%D0%B0%D0%B4%D0%B8%D0%BC%D0%B8%D1%80_%D0%92%D0%B8%D0%BA%D1%82%D0%BE%D1%80%D0%BE%D0%B2%D0%B8%D1%87)
[EN], deputy executive editor of the liberal radio station _Echo Moskvy_ , was
hacked after a critical post on Russian economy and censorship practiced in
Russian newspapers: he had claimed that newspapers were forbidden to use the
word “crisis” and to write about the recession. A couple of months later, the
exchange rate of the Russian ruble rose almost twice towards the U.S.. dollar,
while the country's economy faced a downfall [as a part of the global
recession](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Late-2000s_recession) [EN].
Varfolomeev later [explained](http://www.echonews.ru/2008/10/07/vzloman-
stjort-i-udaljon.html) [RUS] the attack:

> Кто-то считает, что взлом блога готовился давно. Скорее всего, так и было –
> сигнальчики в виде соответствующих угроз поступали периодически.  
>  С другой стороны, думаю, последней каплей стал недавний пост о кремлёвской
> финансовой цензуре, уж слишком большой и серьёзный отклик он вызвал.

Some people think that the hijacking of the blog had been prepared long in
advance. Probably it was like they said – from time to time, I used to receive
signals with threats. On the other hand, I think the last straw was my recent
post about the Kremlin's financial censorship; it got way too much exposure.

Most of the hijacking cases were carried out through e-mail hacking. _The New
Times_ [explained](http://newtimes.ru/articles/detail/3004/) [RUS] how it
worked: hackers were combining technical and “social” methods of hacking,
researching their targets, then hijacking e-mail accounts with the help of
additional questions (mother maiden's name, pet's name, etc.), and then
attacking blog accounts.

Explanations of hacker attacks were often posted at the ‘official’ website of
the hacker group called [_Virtual
Inquisition_](http://torquemada.bloground.ru/) [RUS] (the site seems to be
authentic). The language of the site is a highly transformed Russian Internet
slang with lots of cursing and personal threats towards earlier and potential
future victims.

However, by the end of 2009, hacker attacks stopped. Not for a long time,
though: in spring 2010, they resumed. This time, they were aimed at commercial
bloggers (those who earn money by promoting certain products or services). In
March 2010, the blog of Igor Bigdanov, one of the top Ukrainian bloggers, [was
hijacked](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2010/03/26/russia-top-bloggers-
account-hacked/) [EN]. Somewhat later, the blog of another top-ranking paid
blogger Maxim Sviridenkov was [hijacked and
defaced](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2010/05/26/russia-another-top-blogger-
hacked/) [EN]. Hackers also attacked Sviridenkov's supporter Renata
Guseletova, who declared publicly that hackers should be prosecuted. The
attacks on the blog and Facebook account of journalist Igor Maltsev [took
place next](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2010/05/31/russia-journalists-blog-
hacked/) [EN].

After the attack, Sviridenkov [called for
justice](http://sviridenkov.livejournal.com/186923.html?thread=8290859) [RUS],
especially considering the fact that the alleged hacker lived on the territory
of the European Union (several victims spotted German IP-addresses of several
attacks) – he asked his readers to spread the news about the attack. To back
up his words with actions, Sviridenkov [filed a
complaint](http://sviridenkov.livejournal.com/189155.html#cutid1) [RUS] with
the Russian police.

Several conclusions can be made. First, every blogger (both in Russia and
elsewhere) is a potential target of blog hijacking as long as the _Brigade of
Hell_ exists. Currently hackers enjoy impunity, while bloggers can only resort
to tightening blog and e-mail security, but cannot rely on legal enforcement.
Second, currently the hacker group is not receiving orders to attack political
bloggers, but is spending its time on commercial cases. However, this is
likely to change closer to the upcoming elections. Third, the most significant
hacker methods are social – bloggers who deal with controversial issues should
be careful about the information they leave about themselves on the Web.

