[![](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2010/11/223x314-pink1.gif)](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2010/11/29/take-
bach-the-tech-to-eliminate-violence-against-women/223x314-pink1/)

The collaborative global campaign [Take Back the
Tech!](http://www.takebackthetech.net) started on November 25, the
[International Day for the Elimination of Violence Against
Women.](http://www.un.org/depts/dhl/violence/) New information technologies
are being used in many ways against women and girls around the world. It is
fundamental that they become tools of change and transformation, rather than
control and exclusion. This is one of the very objectives of the Take Back the
Tech! campaign.

Take Back the Tech! (on Twitter
[@takebackthetech](http://twitter.com/takebackthetech), using
#takebackthetech) will have daily action campaigns during the [16 Days of
Activism Against Gender Violence](http://16dayscwgl.rutgers.edu/) (November 25
– December 10 each year). This year it is focused on developing [ actions that
defend women's right to freedom and expression and
information](http://www.takebackthetech.net/story/takebackthetechcall2010).
Women and men in more than 30 countries have used information technologies
such as the internet, mobile phones, and radio to document and fight violence
against women since the campaign was developed by the [Association of
Progressive Communications Women's Networking Support
Program](http://www.apcwomen.org/) (APC WNSP) in 2006.

The people behind Take Back The tech! have created a wonderful video on the
relationships of women, technology and violence against women available in
[Spanish](http://youtube.com/dominemostecnologia ),
[French](http://youtube.com/techsansviolence) and
[English](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=DCwK8Y1Unr4):

On behalf of Global Voices, I interviewed [Erika
Smith](http://www.apc.org/en/user/Erika), the APC WNSP communications
coordinator, on issues regarding the campaign, violence against women, gender
and technology, and the intersections of the global and the local.

**Global Voices (GV)-** What is the objective of the Take Back the Tech!
campaign?

**Erika Smith (ES)-** The Take Back the Tech! campaign aims to eliminate
violence against women (VAW) by using any technology within our reach to
document, denounce and transform the reality of violence women face in every
corner of the world – violence that is also now, increasingly, in online
spaces or perpetrated using information and communication technologies (ICTs).
This year the campaign focuses on defending women's rights to freedom of
expression and access to information – essential rights in order to be safe
online and off, find support, and mobilise against violence. The campaign's
daily actions for every one of the 16 days from 25 November to 10 December
deepen our understandings of VAW and the interconnections with ICTs, and push
us to experiment with technology in different ways.

The campaign calls on everyone – from everyday internet users to bloggers to
geeks to social network fiends and sms-addicts to channel energies towards
ending VAW, it connects online action with direct local actions.

**GV-** What is the importance of a having a global campaign directed to
empowering women through the use of technology?

**ES-** Technology does not empower women, women empower themselves when they
use and transform technology to respond to their needs. Many women have grown
up in societies where technology is presented as out of their reach – gender
stereotypes, access and affordability have meant that many women see
technology as something that is “not for them”. Questioning that stereotype
and demystifying technology in such settings breaks down assumptions made
about women and that women make about themselves, too. In the [APC
WNSP](http://www.apcwomen.org/en) (APC Women) we've found that women and
technology are a powerful mix for social change where the potential for
women's empowerment is impressive. Just taking the time out to examine the
possibilities for information and communication technologies at the service of
women's needs and rights has been eye-opening for many women – be they techies
or with limited experience in ICT.

Violence against women is so often seen and experienced as a private,
personal, intimate very local problem and as such invisibilised. Yet it is a
global pandemic, a threat to world public health and security, that women have
tirelessly mobilised against for decades – locally and globally. November 25
for many is a day of paralysing images and statistics, and the 16 Day campaign
came out of feminists’ insistence on keeping the spotlight on VAW and
demanding real solutions. Take Back the Tech! accompanies the 16 Days of
Activism against Gender Violence to help grow the movement, increasingly
interconnect actions, and build awareness about how technology is also
transforming the way women can experience violence and mobilise against it.

**GV-** What are some of the relationships of gender and technology?

**ES-** I already mentioned gender stereotypes about women and technology
above, especially acute for older women who did not grow up in the computer
age. But even with these stereotypes breaking down due to increased access and
presence of ICTs in so many spheres of our lives (and too the current
popularity of geekiness) women are still seen as consumers and users of
technology and in the labour market are concentrated in the data-capture and
call centre service provision of ICT work.

Hardware and software developers are predominantly male. ICT developments are
permeating our lives on so many fronts – from our moments of intimacy to the
way we interact with our governments. We seldom take time out to reflect on
these changes from a gender and social change perspective, and question the
implications. How do you sanction violence against women online? How much real
harm is there in virtual cyberstalking? What happens behind the code? Who
makes decisions and finances infrastructure? Why are certain developments
benefiting big enterprise prioritised and social access needs ignored?
Cybercrime conventions seem to emphasise piracy more than trafficking of
women.

**GV-** How does Take Back the Tech connect the local with the global?

**ES-** There are local campaigners in over 30 countries who may participate
in the Campaign's daily actions on a personal or collective level, or they
might do something entirely different directly in their communities to put the
spotlight on VAW and ICT. Some campaigners have organised trainings so that
women can use ICTs to mobilise and express themselves for example learning how
to build blogs in Montevideo, explore video and audio production for digital
storytelling in Brazil, or create posters learning how to use graphics
software in Argentina. Others go out on the streets, for example in
Johannesburg interviewing people about VAW, documenting abuse or protesting to
demand solutions. In the Congo girls made information CDs about violence
against women and how to find help, and shared them at beauty salons around
their communities, sparking debate amongst the women stylists and customers.
In Quebec, campaigners held a discussion raising awareness about violence in
popular video games.

