[![](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2010/11/5211457294_1be0b19c60_o-375x220.jpg)](http://www.flickr.com/photos/45909111@N00/5211457294/in/photostream/)

Tensions in Korea by gwydionwilliams on Flickr

Russia's maritime territory [Primorsky
Krai](https://secure.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/wiki/Primorsky_Krai) shares a
border with China and North Korea, and people there followed the news of an
[exchange of fire between North Korea and South
Korea](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2010/11/23/north-korea-south-korea-
deadly-skirmish-live-on-twitter/) on November 23 on the island of
[Yeonpyeong](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Yeonpyeong_Island) with special
concern over the possibility of war.

All regional news sources were following the story. There was little support
[for South
Korea](http://intensedebate.com/commentPopup.php?acct=131e0b26676aa8feba228c6eb3eff2ab&postid=http://news.vl.ru/world/2010/11/23/zhurnal_koreja/&posttitle=&posturl=http://news.vl.ru/world/2010/11/23/zhurnal_koreja/)
[RUS], and the role played by the United States in the conflict was especially
criticized. Some local politicians even said they were convinced it was [South
Korea who provoked the
conflict](http://primamedia.ru/news/politics/23.11.2010/140661/kommunist-iz-
vladivostoka-schitaet-chto-primortsam-ne-stoit-boyatsya-kndr.html) [RUS].

Citizens of Primorsky Krai did not express as many fears as one might think.
In other words, people didn't rush to redeem their holiday tickets for [New
Year's trips to South
Korea](http://primamedia.ru/news/24.11.2010/140708/primortsi-ne-namereni-
otkladivat-otdih-iz-za-sobitiy-v-yuzhnoy-koree-i-kndr.html) [RUS]. And direct
flights to Seoul and Pyongyang [have not been
canceled](http://www.expert.ru/2010/11/24/ne-strashen-nam-bereg-korejskij/)
[RUS] from the airport in Vladivostok.

Local newspaper _Vladnews_ , however, reported that North Korean citizens
[rushed to leave Primorsky Krai](http://vladnews.ru/2010/11/26/36766.html)
[RUS] after the skirmish. According to _VladNews_ this created an unfavorable
economic situation since workers from North Korea represented the cheapest
labor force in the region.

In a comment following an article on local news website _Vl.Ru_ about [South
Korea halting food deliveries to North
Korea](http://news.vl.ru/world/2010/11/25/82523/&posttitle=&posturl=http://news.vl.ru/world/2010/11/25/82523/),
one reader, _samidinah_ ( _самидинах)_
[supported](http://intensedebate.com/commentPopup.php?acct=131e0b26676aa8feba228c6eb3eff2ab&postid=http://news.vl.ru/world/2010/11/25/82523/&posttitle=&posturl=http://news.vl.ru/world/2010/11/25/82523/)
one of the conspiracy theories:

> […] Южная провоцирует кимченировцев с подачи США.  
>  […] Россия уже никуда не лезет. Медвепут с […] (Обамой) уже обо всём
> договорились.  
>  И скоро через нас будет осуществляться транзит пендырской армии.

…The South provoked the Kim Jong Il'ers on a tip from the United States.  
…Russia is not interfering anymore. _Medveput_ … has already agreed on
everything [with Obama]. And soon the transition of the _Pendyr_ Army will be
conducted through us.

(Note: “ _Medveput_ ” is a pejorative term for the president Medvedev and
former Prime prime minister Putin tandem. And “Pendyr” is a pejorative term
for “American”)

Another commenter, _Mozg Cheloveka_ ( _Brain of a Human_ ) replied on [another
_Vl.Ru_
article](http://news.vl.ru/world/2010/11/24/82473/&posttitle=&posturl=http://news.vl.ru/world/2010/11/24/82473/)
about the conflict, [expressing
concerns](http://intensedebate.com/commentPopup.php?acct=131e0b26676aa8feba228c6eb3eff2ab&postid=http://news.vl.ru/world/2010/11/24/82473/&posttitle=&posturl=http://news.vl.ru/world/2010/11/24/82473/)
[RUS] over the possibility of a new war:

> Если начнется Ирак-2 (с вторжением америкосов в КНДР), то это будет пипец.
> Война в 200 километрах от Владивостока.

If Iraq-2 starts (with the invasion of Americans to DPRK), then we are all
screwed. The war would be 200 kilometers from Vladivostok.

Another person commented sarcastically on how a possible war would affect the
upcoming[ Asia Pacific Economic Community (APEC) Summit](http://apec2012.ru/)
that is planned to take place in Vladivostok in 2012. The budget for the APEC
Summit is [reportedly four times a big as the annual budget for the entire
Primosky Krai region](http://www.putin-itogi.ru/doklad/#12), and five times as
big as that of the Olympic games in Vancouver. _Zhaba_ ( _Toad_ )
[said](http://intensedebate.com/commentPopup.php?acct=131e0b26676aa8feba228c6eb3eff2ab&postid=http://news.vl.ru/world/2010/11/24/82473/&posttitle=&posturl=http://news.vl.ru/world/2010/11/24/82473/)
[RUS]:

> Эй, там, на распиле бабок саммита АТЭС! Пилите быстрее, похоже ваш саммит
> накрывается корейским медным тазом!

Hey there, to everyone stealing the APEC summit money! Steal it faster, it
seems like your summit will fold up soon!

Life has moved on, and the Internet community in Primorsky Krai quickly
switched to discussing the consequences of the recent snowstorm; APEC summit
preparation and other vital topics.

It seems like only few believe in the possibility of a real war.

