Since entering Puerto Rico's buoyant independent music scene in late 2008, Los
Niños Estelares (“The Star Kids”) have been known for their unique brand of
socially-conscious, self-referential folk-pop sing-a-longs both online and
off. The group's incisive (yet hilarious) lyrics and well-cultivated image
have found success through Youtube, where the group's videos have received
over 200,000 views to date. Calling to mind other famous comedic rock-duos
such as [Tenacious D](http://www.tenaciousd.com/) and [Flight of the
Concords](http://flightoftheconchords.co.nz/), Fernando Castro Álvarez and
Darío Constaín Reyes imbue Los Niños Estelares's songs with a social
conscience that is all their own.

Their newest video, which you can see above, is for the song “Pari Bus” (slang
for Party Bus) off the upcoming album titled “Tragedias y esperanzas en
tiempos de Internet”, which translates to “Tragedies and Hope in Times of
Internet.” That record is due by the end of the year and will be available
online as a free download via the band's
[website](http://losninosestelares.com).

“Pari Bus” has been viewed over 10,000 times since it was uploaded to Youtube
on October 25, making it an instant success for the band. The clip, directed
by René Pedrosa and “Niño Estelar” Fernando Castro Álvarez comically casts the
band as outcasts inside their own Party Bus. Extras for the video were
solicited through [the band's Facebook support
group](http://www.facebook.com/pages/Los-Ninos-Estelares/23187493573) – which
goes to show Los Niños Estelares's dedication to fully exploiting the Internet
for their music. Also making an appearance throughout the video are some of
Puerto Rico's most celebrated (yet still obscure) Internet characters, such as
the [“Vampiro Industrial”](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=8ScbBk4HFMw) [es]
(Industrial Vampire), [Chovi](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=VFFLk-HU21A) “the
crying boy from Patillas,” and [Fico
Fronte](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=0BVMpYdsmQU), an extreme version of the
local drug-dealer/gang-member with illusions of grandeur created by the
comedic duo of [ESOEZ TV](http://www.youtube.com/user/esoeztv) [NSFW].

![](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2010/11/24045_114485713573_23187493573_2914923_237738_n.jpg)

Photo by Eliud Echevarría courtesy of Los Niños Estelares

When asked to share his thoughts about Puerto Rico's online community and the
local “memes” created through social services and the blogosphere, Fernando
had this to say:

> Creo que la comunidad creativa online puertorriqueña está naciendo poco a
> poco. Ya la televisión puertorriqueña está muerta. La gente está buscando
> material audiovisual puertorriqueño de calidad y está acudiendo al Internet
> para encontrarlo.

I think that Puerto Rico's online creative community is slowly being born.
Puerto Rican television is dead. People are looking for quality Puerto Rican
audiovisual content and they are going online in order to find it.

As slick and funny as the video came out, Fernando is adamant about its
message and its relevance in Puerto Rico's current cultural climate.

> Creo que la canción es muy buena y la razón por la cual es muy buena es
> porque tiene algo MUY importante que decir que casi nadie expresa en Puerto
> Rico. El mensaje principal de la canción es el siguiente: Dile NO a esta
> cultura perniciosa de alcoholismo y de _pari_ sin sentido, al abuso de
> sustancias psicotrópicas y en sí, a la economía subterránea que esclaviza y
> destruye lentamente a nuestro archipiélago del encanto.

I think the song is very good and the reason is because it has something VERY
important to say that almost no one in Puerto Rico expresses. The main message
of the song is the following: Say NO to that pernicious culture of alcoholism
and senseless partying, of psychotropic substance abuse and in essence, to the
underground economy that slowly enslaves and destroys our archipelago of
enchantment, Puerto Rico.

So _who_ is really behind the wheel of this Party Bus?

_For those willing to take the plunge:_ I had the pleasure of interviewing
Fernando Castro Álvarez of Los Niños Estelares and co-director René Pedrosa
about the making of the “Pari Bus” video for
[PuertoRicoIndie.com](http://puertoricoindie.com/2010/10/27/video-debut-en-un-
pari-bus-con-los-ninos-estelares/) [es].

_For the uninitiated:_ There's a great side-by-side comparison of the Internet
character cameos found in the “Pari Bus” video with their original sources of
inspiration over at [ESOEZ](http://arrozconpinga.blogspot.com/2010/10/hagamos-
el-comparativo.html) [es].

