[![Smashed computer screen](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2010/11/smashed_computer_screen-375x205.jpg)](http://www.flickr.com/photos/mandyxclear/3461234232/)

and you thought you had computer problems by Amanda Tetrault on Flickr (CC-BY)

Iran's government has a law at its disposal that make it possible to label
almost any Internet user a criminal.

The “Law of Computer Crimes” (one law with 56 articles) was approved by Iran's
parliament in January 2009. It has been instrumental in the prosecution and
repression of several cyber-activists and bloggers, but its articles have
never received much public attention or scrutiny.

So let’s look at some confusing, surreal and catch-all aspects of the law
concerning internet use and online content.

These are [the main categories of criminal
content](http://www.dadsetan.org/post-148.aspx) under the computer crimes law,
as listed on the blog of a public revolutionary prosecutor (cross-checked with
two sources):

> A – Immoral content  
>  B – Anti-Islamic content  
>  C – Anti-security and disturbing the public peace  
>  D – Criminal content regarding intellectual property and audio and visual
> issues  
>  E – Content encourages, invites or provokes others to commit criminal acts  
>  F – Content against state and public institutions and their
> responsibilities  
>  G – Content used to facilitate other computer crimes

_**No sense of humor**_

It seems rational within the framework of the Islamic Republic to ban
publishing and distribution of anti-Islamic content, but the definitions of
criminal content are even more far reaching. Insulting and satirizing the
state, public institutions, and authorities is also looked upon as criminal.

In other words, you could be charged with committing computer crimes if you
insult Iran's leaders, prophets, and religion, or even make a joke about
public transportation or state-run electricity. That’s right. Disturbing
public opinion regarding state-run organizations and authorities is illegal
too.

_**Waste not, link not**_

Content that encourages, invites or provokes others to commit crimes is
illegal, but so is _linking_ to this (potentially filtered) content, which
could itself be considered as bad as promoting violence, drugs or smuggling,
or anything else. Islamic Republic lawmakers also consider content that
encourages “squandering” (as in wasteful expenditure) against the law. In
other words, anyone who uses the Internet for commercial or marketing purposes
could be questioned. The word “squandering” has not been clearly defined and
leaves room for doubt.

_**Larger than life crimes**_

Also illegal is publishing any propaganda or articles that speak against the
Islamic Republic, contradict Iran's constitution, or cause injury to the
Islamic Republic’s principles. Many observers were surprised [when Facebook
and several other websites were
accused](http://futurechallenges.org/web/guest/learn/globalization/article/-/articles/Iran%27s+usual+suspects%3A+from+Weber+to+Facebook)
by Iranian judiciary officers of participating in a plot against the regime
during the trials of protesters from post-election demonstrations in June
2009. Once content like this falls under the definition of criminal law, even
ordinary social media activity in Iran could potentially be considered
criminal.

Lack of clarity is not just restricted to content, but also to use of the
Internet more generally. According to one article of the law, no one has the
right to use “international broadband based on internet protocols” without
permission to communicate. The Persian words [پهنای باند بین المللی] I
translate to “international broadband” but it's not really clear what they
mean. Two Iranian cyber-activists, [Amin Sabeti
](http://eng.aminsabeti.net)and [Arash Kamangir](http://kamangir.net ), both
consider this restriction confusing and remarked by email to me, that probably
this refers to accessing the internet by satellite which is forbidden in Iran.
But it could also be a reference to using communications software like Skype.

_**More than just words**_

This law is not just ink on paper. It has already been used several times in
recent years to chain bloggers and cyber-activists. Iranian blogger [Omid Reza
Mir Sayafi ](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2009/03/19/omid-reza-mir-sayafi-
iranian-blogger-dies-in-prison/)was jailed for insulting religious leaders and
died in prison in 2009. Only two months ago, blogger [Hossein
Derakhshan](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2010/09/28/iranderakhshan-
sentenced-to-19-5-years-in-prison/) was sentenced to 19 years in prison for
cooperating with hostile countries, spreading propaganda, and insulting
religious figures.

In the end, Iran’s judiciary officials have led us to ask what is more
dangerous for Iranian citizens – lawlessness or the laws themselves?

