[![Happy Raindrop Water Droplet by D Sharon Pruit
CCby](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2010/10/503685059_39c8a1a6e8.jpg)](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2010/10/503685059_39c8a1a6e8.jpg)

[Happy Rainbow Water Droplet
](http://www.flickr.com/photos/pinksherbet/503685059/)by [D Sharon
Pruitt](http://www.flickr.com/photos/pinksherbet/)
[CCby](http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0/deed.en)

Water conservation videos seem to be trending, as people and organizations
make videos with tips and advice on how to better manage our water resources.
From tips on reusing gray water or minimizing wasted water when we flush the
toilet, to kids in the Valle del Colca in Peru explaining the importance of
keeping community water sources clean.

These kids from the rural area of the Colca Valley in Peru[ represent the
consequences of polluting water sources and drinking from
them](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ptprafAzUwc). Rosita and Abelito's mother
sends them to get some water for the house, and off they go with their bucket
to the irrigation ditch. However, community members have been peeing in the
water, people have been tossing trash into it and animals have also been there
to drink the contaminated water, having no other place to drink. Rosita and
Abelito are thirsty after their long trek, so they take a few sips, and then
go back home with their full pail of water. Their chores having been done,
their mother gives them permission to play, but it is cut short when they have
serious stomach pains. Mother takes them to the health post and the doctor
makes them better, warning them however, that they shouldn't drink water that
hasn't been boiled to make it safe for drinking. At the end, Abelito warns the
audience not to urinate or defecate in water sources, and not to litter them
either, so that we can all enjoy clean water.

The [Water Savers 4 Life](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=athqvvn4btw) decided
to sing for water conservation. Their ten tips are sung to the rhythm of a
popular Christmas carol:

[This Spanish household saves water
](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=OqMgMMO7B18)in a literal sense. When they do
laundry (using ecological soaps) the gray water that is expelled from the
machine they have rerouted to a special container where it is saved, and using
a hose system, they have redirected the water to a bucket in the bathroom.
When they need to clean floors, they use the sudsy water, but it is also what
they use when they need to flush the toilet, filling the bucket and then
dumping it into the toilet.

In Singapore there are also concerns on water conservation, and [this
video](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=_18HIuWhTGo) shows some tips many of us
could apply: shorter showers, washing teeth with a glass of water instead of
an open faucet, reusing the rinse water from our washer to flush toilets or
mop floors, washing veggies in a bowl of water, among others. It also shows
that for some cultures, saving water just requires getting creative: one tip
requires saving water from rinsing rice to water plants. If we are not rice
consumers, what other tips could we come up that are tailored specifically to
our water consumption patterns?

As can be seen in the previous example and this following one, water supplying
companies are logically one of the strongest advocates of adequate water use.
From Colombia, in the city of Cartago, the Emcartago utility company not only
[uploads videos on water
consumption](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=gZNCh9vPcGI) to the internet, but
they also[ go to the different
neighborhoods](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=bRm4BQw8dr8) to train people on
good water saving habits. By showing video examples of good and bad water
usage, they get their message across on how to adequately save not only on
water, but also on other utilities such as gas and electricity.

And last, but not least: many new houses have water efficient toilets, but the
rest of households with water guzzling toilets and no money to replace them
with a new model need not despair. [This following
tip](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=VMtcZbgvuAo) will give anyone the
possibility of saving at least a liter of water with every flush. By filling a
1.5 Lt water bottle with water, and placing it in the toilet tank, it will
save you as much water as is displaced by the bottle itself:

Remember, saving water not only saves the planet, but it can also save you
money by reducing your utility bills. Happy Blog Action Day 2010!

