Blogger Alek Careca posted a small [photo
gallery](http://careca.blog.mk/2010/10/10/zoo-skopje-foto-galerija/) [MKD]
from the Skopje Zoo with this comment:

> The Skopje Zoo drastically changed its appearance this year, to a great
> satisfaction of the population from all over Macedonia, but also inciting
> regular flow of visitors from Kosovo and Serbia.

Renovation of the Zoo was real news to most citizens of Skopje, who generally
avoided this decrepit public space in the last few decades for the sake of
their own mental health. Widely considered a place where animals suffer
torture due to unbearable conditions, the Zoo only appeared in the media after
horrendous incidents such as hippo biting off a limb of a visitor in self-
defense, killing of a few deer by burglars, аnd frequent animal deaths or
injuries due to firecrackers, stones, plastic bags thrown by human beings…

[![Jaguar in Skopje Zoo, August 2002. Photo: Filip
Stojanovski.](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2010/11/SkZoo20020825-02-375x281.jpg)](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2010/11/SkZoo20020825-02.jpg)

Jaguar in Skopje Zoo, August 2002. Photo: Filip Stojanovski.

As documented in this [article from
2002](http://razvigor.blogspot.com/2008/01/macedonias-animal-kingdom.html),
completely contrary to their roaming nature, large carnivores were kept numb
in small [concrete cells](http://iofoto.blogspot.com/2007/03/blog-post.html) –
“lying all day, breaking the habit only to pace nervously from time to time in
great speed in front of the iron bars.”

![Lions in Skopje Zoo, August 2002. Photo: Filip
Stojanovski.](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2010/11/SkZoo20020914b-3.jpg)

Lions in Skopje Zoo, August 2002. Photo: Filip Stojanovski.

As such, the Skopje Zoo received a lot of bad press over the years, and became
world infamous around 2007 when [some
foreigners](http://www.bornfreeusa.org/weblog.php?p=2305&more=1) took notice
of Koko the [chimpanzee](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Chimpanzee), and tried
to help him. Orphaned in infancy, Koko suffered from severe depression for
years. His sad face was also used to illustrate the plight of chimps elsewhere
(e.g., a [Reuters
article](http://www.reuters.com/article/idUSN2438996920070524) about the
United States). As a way out of continuous public embarrassment (mostly
perpetrated by _Vest_ daily), the authorities allowed Koko's transfer to [AAP
primate sanctuary in Holland](http://www.aap.nl/english/newsletter-
june-2009.html) in 2009.

In fact, around that time the Skopje Zoo started re-establishing relations
with relevant European associations such as [EAZA](http://www.eaza.net/),
which led to the start of renovations and refurbishing, driven by donors and
exchange partners. Reforms intensified in 2010, after the appointment of Dane
Kuzmanovski as manager.

The Zoo now seems to have more staff, and outsources a private security
agency. Visitors who want to feed the animals can purchase animal-friendly
produce. A cafe and a pony riding rink have been operational since this past
summer. Most of the cages have been renovated, or new habitats built, and
dozens of new animals have been imported, including tigers. Sponsored events
for kids take place in the Zoo, and space for birthday celebrations can be
rented.

Cooperation with [educational institutions](http://university-
acs.com/index.php?news=589), [environmental
NGOs](http://gogreen.mk/en/news/90-memo-for-cooperation-with-zoo-skopje.html)
and the media has been established. An example of the latter is the show “Zoo
Story,” produced by the bilingual (Albanian-Macedonian) [Alsat-M
TV](http://alsat.mk/).

The Skopje Zoo's [Facebook page](http://www.facebook.com/#!/ZooSkopje) has
over 34,000 fans, frequent updates and a responsive administrator capable of
admitting mistakes. Strangely enough, the template of the Zoo's [official
website](http://zooskopje.com.mk/) has not been updated, and its home page
greets its visitors with a [stock photo](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2010/11/20101113-zooskopje.com_.mk_.jpg) made elsewhere.

As with other public enterprises, critics may also grumble about alleged
partisan leanings of business sector partnerships and the
[HR](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Human_resources) policy. Some bad things
have happened due to circumstances outside of the staff's control, such as the
heatwave deaths of two deer and two
[gnus](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wildebeest) transported from Zagreb Zoo in
August. Both zoos
[announced](http://www.time.mk/?search=news&query=%D0%B3%D0%BD%D1%83%D0%B0)
[MKD] they would sue the transport company for not allowing a vet to accompany
the animals on the 610 km trip.

However, the opposition, which often considers governmental endeavors a facade
for money laundering, has been largely silent about the obviously significant
investments of public money in the Skopje Zoo. Possibly because the benefits
are tangible and verifiable: most of the animals now live in decent-looking
enclosures where they can touch ground and plants, with access to open sky.
Visitors indeed get more gratifying experiences and spread the word.

[![Lion in Skopje Zoo, July 2010.](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2010/11/IMG00555-20100710-1206-375x281.jpg)](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2010/11/IMG00555-20100710-1206.jpg)

Part of the new lions’ enclosure in the Skopje Zoo, introduced in 2010. Photo:
Filip Stojanovski, CC-BY.

Carolin Weinkopf, a German visitor to the Zoo
[wrote](http://aboutblank.blog.com/2010/07/23/at-the-zoo/) this July:

> There [are] various horror stories online about the zoo in Skopje – and we
> are not zoo-experts, but we couldn’t really understand why. They might have
> cleaned it and put bigger cages when they heard the Germans are coming… but
> for us it looked not much different than the zoo in Berlin, really. Zoos are
> probably never the best thing on earth – anyway – here, almost every species
> was blessed with a bunch of babies, which must be a good sign, or not?

…

Update on Koko: a year ago (Dec. 23, 2009), _Vest_
[reported](http://r.ping.mk/tb/8wk) [MKD] that “the Dutch refuse to let Koko
return” because of the miserable conditions. The latest
[news](http://www.ereporter.com.mk/mk-mk/Details.aspx?Title=14362) [MKD] (Nov.
6, 2010) is that private companies will build a new dwelling for the 14-year-
old ape, who is expected back in April 2011.

