The [It Gets Better Project ](http://www.itgetsbetterproject.com)was started
by Dan Savage as a way of preventing gay teens from committing suicide through
videos explaining what gay adult life could be: lots better. And from
different corners of the world, other people are also sharing their stories.

[Dave ](http://www.itgetsbetterproject.com/video/entry/1744/)talks about
growing up to a family of religious missionaries in Israel, how he even came
to think that exorcism would be a solution to his problems and about his
efforts to try and make sense of his faith in regards to his sexual
orientation.

From Finland, a group of people share their experiences growing up queer. [The
video](http://www.itgetsbetterproject.com/video/entry/1739/) was presented in
the TedXHelsinki conference. It is subtitled in Swedish and English:

[Bashar Makhay
speaks](http://www.itgetsbetterproject.com/video/entry/jbctjy3d4hq/) about the
process of accepting his identity as a middle eastern gay man, or as he calls
himself, a “Gay Chaldean Iraqi American Christian Progressive Man”. Video has
English subtitles if you press the cc button:

A gay Muslim youth speaks about growing up in a very religious Shi'a Muslim
Pakistani household: how he dealt with harassment, his religious beliefs and
his family's take on his his sexuality:

From the Spanish speaking community there are several videos found under the
title “Todo va a Mejorar”. One such video was uploaded by  
[Constantino from Guatemala](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Ec5M4ge-HZE) who
currently lives in New York City. He speaks about growing up in a chauvinistic
society, his doubts and how just hanging on and following your dreams can go a
long way: He is currently living his dream.

As a first generation immigrant from Greece, [greekcub
tells](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ukQlql3PvS8) of the importance of being
true to yourself, despite the traditional cultural norms that may seem
incompatible with happiness, and at the end, he records a special message for
any queer Greek teens going through rough times:

And finally, Kelly Kim explains in ASL how it was for him to grow up being
picked on for being deaf and being bullied, afraid for his Korean family's
reaction to his sexual identity until he finally decided to come out of the
closet. The video is captioned in English:

There are many more videos both on the It Gets Better Project website as well
as on YouTube. And hopefully, any teen being bullied because they are
different will be able to find support and inspiration in these videos and
stories.

