[![Center of Vladivostok and Zolotoy Rog, photo by Vladimir
Kobzar](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2010/10/Center_of_Vladivostok_and_Zolotoy_Rog-375x247.jpg)](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Center_of_Vladivostok_and_Zolotoy_Rog.jpg)

Center of Vladivostok and Zolotoy Rog, photo by Vladimir Kobzar

On September 8, 2010, [Vladivostok](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Vladivostok)
city administration
[announced](http://www.vlc.ru/news/press/2010/09/20100908_03.htm) [RUS] an
open discussion about the name of a new bridge over Golden Horn (“[Zolotoy
Rog](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Golden_Horn_Bay)“) Bay. The bridge will
connect two parts of the city and allegedly help the traffic. Also, there will
be the second bridge that will connect the city and the closest island.

These ambitious and expensive projects are part of the preparation process for
the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation
([APEC](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/APEC_Russia_2012)) Summit, which will
take place in Vladivostok in 2012. The budget for this event is huge, but not
much has been done yet. Only two years are left and the bridges are not even
halfway done. Vladivostok citizens have reasons to suspect that the two
gigantic bridges will never be built on time and the money will vanish in
someone’s pocket, thus leaving the city without the necessary infrastructure.

On his blog, Vladivostok's mayor _Igor Pushkarev_ [provided](http://igor-
pushkarev.livejournal.com/4553.html) [RUS] a possibility for users to vote for
the favorable name of the bridge over the bay. People could choose out of 30
names. The following names were the most remarkable ones: Hope Bridge, Golden
Bridge, Zolotoy Rog (Golden Horn, after the name of the bay), Darkin’s Bridge
(after the name of the current governor), Far Eastern Bridge, etc.

Blogger _hiamado_ [wondered](http://hiamado.livejournal.com/8426.html) [RUS]
why there was no such a name as Kickback Bridge (“откатный мост” in Russian),
alluding to various corruption cases tied to the summit preparation process.

APEC preparation became a subject for countless jokes both in the regional
blogosphere and offline. Local bloggers have created an alternative list of
names for the bridge. In April 2010, even before an open discussion was
announced, blogger _matvienko_vlc_ [provided](http://matvienko-
vlc.livejournal.com/16263.html) his critical evaluation of the initiative. He
gave examples of alternative names for the bridge taken from various bloggers.
Here are some of the examples:

> «Мост Бесценный», «Мост Мы-б…-уже-и-не-надеялись», «Путинский», […], «Мост в
> светлое будущее», «Медвепуть» («Путинпровод»), […], «Откатный» (вариант —
> «Золотой откат»), «Ворота в ад», «Хайшеньвей-бридж».

Bridge Priceless, Bridge We-Were-About-To-Lose-Hope-Already-Dammit, Putin
Bridge, Bridge to the Bright Future, Medveput (Putinway), Golden Kickback
Bridge, Gates to Hell, Hǎishēnwǎi Bridge [this is how the Chinese call
Vladivostok]

These mocking names reflect the attitude of ordinary people towards the
government and the whole idea of the APEC Summit.

On Sept. 20, a daily news outlet _Novosti Vladivostoka_ (News of Vladivostok)
[informed](http://novostivl.ru/msg/12767.htm) [RUS] that citizens of
Vladivostok could monitor the construction works via publications on a blog
called [churkinsky_most](http://churkinsky-most.livejournal.com/) (Churkin
Bridge). According to the article, this blog provides the latest information
on the maintenance works for the APEC Summit. In reality the blog gives an
idea of how this bridge will look like by providing computer-generated images
(like [this one](http://pics.livejournal.com/churkinsky_most/pic/00010t74) or
[this](http://pics.livejournal.com/churkinsky_most/pic/0000qzrx)). Not much is
written there about the real situation and problems on the construction sites.

An accurate image of the bridge construction works is provided by bloggers
[_hajoff_](http://hajoff.livejournal.com/) and [_zeka_vasch_](http://zeka-
vasch.livejournal.com/) in the [Vladivostok city LJ
community](http://community.livejournal.com/vladivostok). There you can find
pictures of the construction sites and of the houses that have to be destroyed
to clear the space. At the same time, it is unclear what will happen to the
people who live in these houses.

Unfortunately, all the people’s dissatisfaction and distrust is being totally
ignored by the local government. Luckily enough, people react to these issues
and share their views and stories on blogs. Voting for the bridge’s name will
be over in mid-October. Of course, the name Golden Kickback Bridge was not on
the list, even though it reflects the nature of this initiative better than
any other name.

