She has been in prison for 15 years in the past 21 years, but now she is [free
at last](http://www.irrawaddy.org/highlight.php?art_id=20068). Burmese pro-
democracy icon and opposition leader Aung San Suu Kyi was
[released](http://www.irrawaddy.org/article.php?art_id=20069) from detention
by the military-backed government of Myanmar Saturday afternoon, a week after
the holding of a nationwide
[election](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2010/11/09/myanmar-election-junta-
backed-party-wins-violence-erupts/) which was dominated by pro-administration
candidates.

_The Democratic Voice of Burma_ was able to
[document](http://www.dvb.no/news/first-footage-emerges-of-suu-kyi/12844) the
first few minutes of her release. This video shows Suu Kyi waving to
supporters in front of her lakeside house.

[AUNG SAN SUU KYI RELEASED](http://vimeo.com/16792012) from [DVBTV
English](http://vimeo.com/user3352194) on [Vimeo](http://vimeo.com).

News spread out last Thursday that Suu Kyi will be freed this weekend on the
date of expiration of her house arrest sentence. It was reported that [she has
signed the paper](http://www.irrawaddy.org/article.php?art_id=20054) for her
release around 12pm on that day. Even members of the National League for
Democracy (NLD), Suu Kyi's party, started
[cleaning](http://www.irrawaddy.org/article.php?art_id=20047) the
headquarter's secretariat office in anticipation of her release. On Friday,
there was a crowd of [500 or more people
gathering](http://www.irrawaddy.org/article.php?art_id=20053) in front of the
NLD office in Yangon, all waiting for “Aunty Su's” release. A banner in front
of the headquarters reads “[Today's the Day of Her
Release](http://www.mizzima.com/gallery/photo-news/4520-photo-news-
november-2010.html)“.

More than 100 NLD members and supporters also donated blood at a local
hospital to draw attention to her release.

Suu Kyi's impending freedom was later doubted when the Burmese top court
[rejected her final appeal](http://www.mizzima.com/news/inside-burma/4568-top-
court-rejects-suu-kyi-appeal-against-detention.html) against her house arrest
this Friday, making the people anxious whether she will be released or not.

Meanwhile, Kim Aris, Aung San Su Kyi's son [reportedly has gotten his visa
approved](http://www.irrawaddyblog.com/2010/11/blog-post_9413.html) to visit
Myanmar.

Now that Suu Kyi is free at last, independent media site _The Irrawaddy_ urges
its readers to submit suggestions and other ideas to Suu Kyi

[![](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2010/11/suu_kyi.png)](http://www.irrawaddy.org/)

The world rejoiced when Suu Kyi, a Nobel Peace Prize winner, was freed from
house arrest. Twitter users used the hashtag
[#aungsansuukyi](http://twitter.com/#search?q=%23aungsansuukyi) as they joined
the [global conversation](http://trendsmap.com/topic/%23aungsansuukyi) in
celebrating Suu Kyi's freedom.

