[![](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2010/10/afisha-375x250.jpg)](http://liz-
anderson.livejournal.com/76145.html)They say journalists should be objective
and impartial and never get too close and personal with politicians. When
young female journalism students decided to openly express their admiration
for Russian Prime Minister Vladimir Putin, “objectivity” and “impartiality”
were overshadowed by sexual innuendo and erotic lingerie.

Although the fact that several young Russian girls posed half-naked for a
calendar is nothing new, many people were outraged that the name of the MGU
journalism department was attached to the pictures. _The Moscow Diaries_
provides a detailed account of the incident
[here](https://themoscowdiaries.wordpress.com/2010/10/06/happy-birthday-mr-
president/) [ENG] along with an English translation of the posters. The
scandal went well beyond the student community and of course became among the
most discussed topics of the blogosphere.

Blogger _TovarishK_ pretty much [sums
up](http://tovarishk.livejournal.com/68086.html) [RUS] the opinion of one
group of bloggers who considered the half-naked journalism students as
improper and offensive:

> На самом деле, надо быть конченным подонком и извращенцем, чтобы в стране,
> где огромное количество проблем, вызванных некомпетентностью власти, дарить
> этой власти в подарок эротический календарь.

Really, one has to be a hopeless jerk and pervert to present an erotic
calendar as a gift to the government in the country with many problems caused
by this government’s incompetence.

_timur_nechaev77_[ seconds this](http://timur-
nechaev77.livejournal.com/34826.html\)) [RUS]:

> К сожалению, холуйство и проституция типичное явление среди представителей
> студенческого быдла, и кто холоп в душе, тот так холопом и останется,
> независимо от наличия диплома о высшем образовании.

Unfortunately, prostitution and pleasing people in power are typical among
rednecks students and a serf in the shower will remain a serf despite her
university diploma.

And here is another blogger, _obormoto_ , [expressing his
opinion](http://obormoto.livejournal.com/133156.html) [RUS]:

> Очень показательно. Студенток журфака МГУ с юных лет учат, в чем их главный
> талант, для чего они нужны стране. А главное учат, как правильно общаться с
> властью – быть похожей на придорожную блядь (см. “прокатите на калине”).

Very revealing. They teach young journalism students where their important
talent is and why the country needs them. And, what is the most important,
they teach how to treat the government – to be like a roadside whore (see
“give me a ride on a Kalina”).

A day later, another version of the calendar came out of the same journalism
department. It featured different female students who were dressed officially
and who asked unpleasant political questions (see _The Moscow Diaries_ article
with English translation of the “different” calendar [here
](https://themoscowdiaries.wordpress.com/2010/10/07/loosen-up/)[ENG]).

Unlike the erotic calendar that was also sold in regular supermarkets, the
political version is online-based and does not have (yet) a physical
manifestation. However, bloggers encouraged people to print out those pages
and put them on the walls in their homes or work places.

After a while, the “calendar case” began to take the shape of a farce with a
slight political connotation. Blogger _zlaya_uchilka_ , for example, [released
another version of the calendar](http://zlaya-
uchilka.livejournal.com/667377.html) [RUS] with pictures of half-naked male
models from glossy magazines and ripped-off sexual innuendos targeted at Putin
from the very first version of the calendar.

_edgar-hoover_ went even further and created [calendar with images of half-
naked retired women](http://edgar-hoover.livejournal.com/608009.html) [RUS]
expressing their love for the [recently
sacked](http://www.nytimes.com/2010/09/29/world/europe/29moscow.html?scp=5&sq=luzhkov&st=cse)
[ENG] mayor of Moscow Yuri Luzhkov (Luzhkov was very popular with Moscow
retirees who, thanks to the mayor’s efforts, enjoy the highest pensions in
Russia). And _ibigdan_ [posted a version of the
calendar](http://ibigdan.livejournal.com/7335727.html) [RUS] with faces of
Russian and occasionally international high-profile politicians (like Barack
Obama) praising Vladimir Putin. The case gradually becomes an Internet meme.

The “battle of calendars” simultaneously emerged on different platforms.
Russian traditional media also actively cover the scandal blowing it out of
proportions. But it is not surprising that the blogosphere and social networks
(Vkontakte.ru, for example) provide much deeper look at the case due to their
interactivity and public engagement.

