While Internet analysts across the Atlantic [are busy
arguing](http://goodintents.org/aid-debates/revolution-tweeted) if the use of
technology brings about social and political change, bloggers in Russia add
their humble contributions to the debate, probably unaware that the debate is
taking place at all. Their victories are few and small and their impact can
easily be attributed to statistical error – but they certainly are out there.

The Russian blogosphere's success stories of the past few months have one
thing in common: leveraged by the online media, the stories have resulted in
executive decisions that helped people defend their rights.

**Fixing Obscenity and Injustice**

In May 2010, 44-year-old Difgat Khantimerov, head of the Yermekeevo district
of [Bashkortostan](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bashkortostan), was captured
on video ordering schoolchildren on a school volleyball team to kiss his feet
while doing push-ups. Such a “creative” approach to physical education
attracted bloggers’ attention and within several months the video posted by
YouTube user [_ermekeevo2010_](http://www.youtube.com/user/ermekeevo2010) had
almost 300,000 views:

It took three and a half months for the video to reach the mainstream media.
One of the reasons it took so long was that Khantimerov, outraged by the
uncontrollable distribution of the video,
[ordered](http://www.nr2.ru/incidents/299914.html/print/) [RUS] the local
Internet Service Provider to cancel any works on the development of broadband
in Yermekeevo district.

Another reason was that none of the humiliated kids wanted to draw publicity
to what happened in the school's gym. At the end, however, Khantimerov didn't
escape responsibility. As soon as the mainstream media (such as _lenta.ru_ and
_rg.ru_ ) took the initiative from bloggers, the president of Bashkortostan
[ordered](http://lenta.ru/news/2010/09/11/humiliation/) [RUS] to dismiss the
official. Later on, Khantimerov
[apologised](http://www.kp.ru/online/news/738420/) [RUS] to the humiliated
kids.

Lilia Gumerova, the children's ombudsman in Bashkortostan and the woman who
brought the whole story to the masses, wouldn't have achieved even a small
part of this without a mobile phone camera, YouTube, and the shocked viewers.

**Investigative Crowdsourcing**

The story of Anna Buzilo (Vladivostok) shows how investigative crowdsourcing
can be more efficient than the police. 25-year-old Anna disappeared on June
14, 2010. Three days later, user _Kripton_ fromVladivostok forum _drom.ru_
[started](http://forums.drom.ru/vladivostok/t1151406117.html) [RUS] a thread
asking the fellow netizens for help. On June 18, blogger _LeRoN_
[posed](http://forums.drom.ru/1088738384-post28.html) [RUS] a trivial
question:

> Кстати, она со своим парнем не ссорилась?

By the way, did she have any fights with her boyfriend?

Only in September, when Anna's murderer was found, did _LeRoN_ realize how
close to truth he was when he asked that question.

Later on, over 500 _drom.ru_ users joined Anna's friends and relatives in
search for her, her murderer or kidnapper. Blogger _Bedaan_ [set
up](http://forums.drom.ru/vladivostok/t1151410136.html) [RUS] a voluntary fund
to pay for gasoline for those who were involved in looking for any traces of
Anna. Other bloggers were disseminating leaflets with basic information about
the woman. Some users took police dogs to search in the remote places of the
city, others used private channels to [retrieve her cell phone
logs](http://forums.drom.ru/1089145603-post200.html) [RUS] from the phone
company.

Three months after Anna's disappearance, Pavel, her boyfriend, said he had
kidnapped her and asked for $130,000 ransom. He was immediately arrested.
According to the [interview](http://ptr-vlad.ru/news/ptrnews/36022-ubijjca-
anny-buzilo-poprosil-proshhenija-u-ee.html) [RUS] with one of the participants
of the search, forum users considered this version as the main one. After some
time, Pavel confessed to a murder and showed where he had left Anna's body.

Without forums like _drom.ru_ , Anna's case would have never been investigated
as thoroughly.

Another story happened in Yekaterinburg region, where three cars were
terrorizing local drivers, while being ignored by policemen. In one of the
incidents, drivers of the “three black cars with Tyumen [a neighboring region]
license plates” vandalized a random car. LJ user _pilgrim-67_
[analyzed](http://piligrim-67.livejournal.com/966964.html) [RUS] the case. He
used the
[observations](http://www.e1.ru/talk/forum/read.php?f=67&t=6851977&i=6851977)
[RUS] and[
photos](http://lh6.ggpht.com/_r2KqecZ5too/TH8slHniAtI/AAAAAAAAEs4/SIOgs2POBVk/s800/885827.jpg)
[RUS] of the local forum to identify the license plates of the cars, found the
names of the owners of these cars and found the owners’ accounts on
Odnoklassniki.ru, a Russian social network. He successfully retrieved full
personal information of the offenders. Moreover, he discovered that these road
bandits, who had operated with such impunity, were connected to the “United
Russia” party members in Tyumen region.

After _pilgrim-67_ ‘s investigation of the case, the police launched a
criminal case and arrested one of the offenders. Again, the social media have
played two roles, that of an investigator, and a pressure-maker.

**Exposing Corruption**

Previously, GV covered the role of LiveJournal communities as a transparency
tool. The impact of individual bloggers, like Alexey Navalny and Ivan Begtin,
has become even more important in the past few weeks: they have prevented
stealing $1.8 million.

On October 15, 2010, Yevgeniy Lerner (LJ user _evgeniy1001_ )
[published](http://evgeniy1001.livejournal.com/15434.html) a post titled “55
mln rubles in 16 days? – a social network from the Ministry of Health,” in
which he pointed out a strange tender issued by the Ministry of Health. The
tender foresaw spending $1.8 million in nearly two weeks. It was evident for
every IT professional that the task formulated in such a way was impossible to
implement within the stated amount of time.

Alexey Navalny, Ivan Begtin, and other bloggers
[launched](http://navalny.livejournal.com/512241.html) [RUS] a blog campaign,
raising awareness about the suspicious conditions of the tender, which
[resulted](http://navalny.livejournal.com/514023.html) [RUS] in resignation of
the official responsible for issuing the tender, as well as the cancellation
of the tender.

The case inspired Navalny so much that he
[offered](http://navalny.livejournal.com/514097.html) [RUS] IT specialists all
over the country to evaluate all upcoming government IT projects and check
whether they looked suspicious. After this call, two more tenders were
immediately canceled. Navalny
[admitted](http://navalny.livejournal.com/517479.html) [RUS] that,
unfortunately, he no longer believed there were any non-suspicious IT tenders
whatsoever.

All these cases prove one point: the new media are making a difference in the
areas where nothing could be done before.

