Tropical storm Thomas has seriously affected Costa Rica which has declared a
State of National Emergency. The strong rains have caused extensive damage
throughout the country: So far 20 people died under a landslide to the west of
the Capital of San José, other people are still missing, hundreds have been
evacuated and at least 11 roads and highways have been blocked or closed.

[Richard Molina writes on his
blog](http://richardmolina.cr/app/cms/www/index.php?pk_noticia=2724) [es]
summarizing the key points of the national emergency, including the hundreds
who were left without water services. He also points out the country's low
emergency response capabilities:

> Debido a la gravedad de la situación y a la limitación de recursos, la Cruz
> Roja Costarricense está enfocando sus esfuerzos a la atención de incidentes
> donde se registra afectación directa de personas.

Due to the seriousness of the situation and the limited resources, the
Costarican Red Cross is focusing its efforts to the attention of incidents
where direct impact on people has been registered.

President Laura Chinchilla has also [requested help from neighboring
countries](http://www.nacion.com/2010-11-04/ElPais/UltimaHora/ElPais2579013.aspx)
[es], specifically asking for helicopters that might help with rescue efforts
and in reaching the communities which have become isolated due to landslides
and bridge collapses.

On Youtube, people have already started uploading videos of how they've lived
the torrential downpours which soaked the nation during the past couple of
days.

[FabinSerrano recorded ](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Z6aSy0_vbYE)how his
neighborhood was flooded by the river in Tejar del Guarco:

[RazgrizCr](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=g0uZNx261h8) shot through his
windshield the flooded streets last night in Heredia, to the north of San
José.

[Fdelgadoz2000 ](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ovAOxR-HVwQ)shows us how the
Turrucares bridge over the Virilla River has disappeared:

[DecorockCr](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=bkphn2NzpMc) shows us [flooding in
Parrita](http://www.nacion.com/2010-11-04/Sucesos/UltimaHora/Sucesos2579324.aspx)
[es], where hundreds of people have been sent to temporary shelters:

Outrage is palpable, as flooding and damages due to rains are a yearly event
and the government hasn't been able to foresee or plan ahead to prevent the
disruption and loss of lives. On twitter, Marco A. Salazar
[(@masala777](https://twitter.com/masala777/status/29690915327)) states:

> tantas veces dijeron los expertos que esto podía pasar…. ya van por 20 los
> muertos… esto quien lo va a explicar?

The experts repeatedly said this could happen… death count is up to 20… who is
going to explain all this?

So far there is still confusion as to what can be done to help out and send
aid to those in need. The Costa Rican Social Security Institute which is in
charge of the hospitals has [posted on
Facebook](https://www.facebook.com/note.php?note_id=163322617031453&id=120996387924093)
[es][
](https://www.facebook.com/note.php?note_id=163322617031453&id=120996387924093)explaining
what they are doing to help, and also giving ideas of what others can do:

> Como parte de las previsiones que se están tomando, el Banco Nacional de
> Sangre (BNS), alertó sobre la necesidad de que se done sangre tipo O
> positivo, toda vez que las reservas son escasas. La doctora Erna Meléndez,
> directora de esa dependencia, solicitó que vayan a donar al BNS, ubicado al
> costado sur de la iglesia de Zapote.

As part of the precautionary actions, the National Blood Bank has alerted
about the need for Type O positive blood, since reserves are very low. Doctor
Erna Meléndez, director for this department has requested for donations to go
to the center located at the south side of the Zapote church.

Journalist [Marianella
Cordero](https://twitter.com/MarianellaCorde/status/29692716703) [es] has
replied to twitter requests to give out information about where donations can
be taken, and has written that the Juan XXIII school in San Antonio of Escazú
is receiving donations of food, clothes and money, but adds that she would
also recommend taking water, since the government's recommendation has been to
boil all water due to possible contamination at its sources.

However, official channels for donations have not been sanctioned by the
government yet, and through twitter [the issue is being echoed everywhere
](https://twitter.com/rigo9inchnails/status/29668448943)[es]: the media should
be informing the population on how to help by relaying which are the bank
accounts receiving donations, and where goods are being received.

