_**This post is part of our special coverage[Côte d'Ivoire Unrest
2011](https://globalvoicesonline.org/specialcoverage/cote-divoire-
unrest-2011/).**_

On this Sunday, October 31st, registered voters in Côte d'Ivoire [cast their
ballots](http://af.reuters.com/article/newsOne/idAFJOE69U09B20101031?sp=true)
in the first [presidential
election](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ivorian_presidential_election,_2010) in
10 years, due to the [Civil
War](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ivorian_Civil_War) that broke out in 2002
and the subsequent issues that arose from it. The election date had been
postponed six times since 2005, when Laurent Gbagbo's five-year mandate
officially came to an end, amid rows over rebel disarmament and voter
registration. A second round is scheduled for November 28.

Despite some initial delays in some polling stations, voting has been
reportedly peaceful and the turnout appears to have been good. The [African
Elections Project](http://www.africanelections.org/coted%27ivoire/) created [a
Twitter account](http://twitter.com/cotedivoirevote) to follow the
developments of the voting day, and various citizen journalists and Twitterers
in Côte d'Ivoire also tweeted updates throughout the day using the hashtag
[#civ2010](http://twitter.com/search?q=%23civ2010). Here is a selection of
pictures of the voting day shared on Twitter:

[![](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-content/uploads/2010/11/Elections-Cote-
dIvoire1.jpg)](http://twitpic.com/32mg99)

Lines outside of polling station in Abidjan. Photo by AEP Côte d'Ivoire

[![](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-content/uploads/2010/11/Elections-Cote-
dIvoire2.jpg)](http://twitpic.com/32kyne)

Lines outside of polling station in Abidjan. Photo by AEP Côte d'Ivoire

[![](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-content/uploads/2010/11/Elections-Cote-
dIvoire3.jpg)](http://twitpic.com/32jwzd)

Happy voter showing the ink mark on her finger after casting the ballot. Photo
by Nnenna Nwakanma

While voters in Côte d'Ivoire enjoyed a relatively smooth and peaceful
election day, it seems that their fellow Ivorians living in France had a
harder time casting their ballots. About 11,500 voters were registered to vote
in one of the 28 polling stations in the Paris region, but [according to
France24](http://www.france24.com/en/20101101-ivory-coast-expat-overseas-vote-
ivorians-paris-fume-rant-anger-confusion), several of them failed to open on
Sunday sparking anger among voters. Twitterer [Jolan
K](http://twitter.com/#!/Jolan_K/status/29284014505) photographed some of the
500 voters gathered outside the Ivorian consulate in French capital’s swanky
16th district.

[![](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-content/uploads/2010/11/Ivorian-
Elections-Paris.jpg)](http://twitpic.com/32mffv)

Ivorian expats waiting to vote at the consulate in Paris. Photos by Jolan K

American writer Carol Spindel, who wrote a book 20 years ago about life in an
Ivorian village titled [In the shadow of the sacred
grove](http://www.carolspindel.com/in_the_shadow_of_the_sacred_grove_101575.htm),
recently traveled to Côte d'Ivoire to write about the presidential elections.
For that purpose she set up a blog, [One village
votes](http://www.onevillagevotes.blogspot.com/), in which she's been
documenting the electoral process. On Sunday she [posted some
photos](http://onevillagevotes.blogspot.com/2010/10/election-day-in-
korhogo.html) of the election day in the northern town of Korhogo:

[![](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-content/uploads/2010/11/Elections-Cote-
dIvoire4.jpg)](http://onevillagevotes.blogspot.com/2010/10/election-day-in-
korhogo.html)

Voting in Korhogo. Photo by Carol Spindel

A few days earlier, Carol visited a group of women in a village near Korhogo
who were learning how to vote in the dark, with the aid of a flashlight and a
photocopy of a ballot:

[![](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-content/uploads/2010/11/Elections-Cote-
dIvoire5.jpg)](http://onevillagevotes.blogspot.com/2010/10/natagora-gets-out-
vote-for-ado.html)

Women learning how to vote a few days before the election. Photo by Carol
Spindel.

The results of the Sunday Presidential election should be officially announced
within the next 72 hours.

_**This post is part of our special coverage[Côte d'Ivoire Unrest
2011](https://globalvoicesonline.org/specialcoverage/cote-divoire-
unrest-2011/).**_

