There have been more than 270 deaths due to cholera in Haiti and around 3
thousand infected people. The outbreak, which started in Saint Marc, has been
spreading to the capital city, Port-au-Prince, where the first case was
confirmed. Experts from the Pan American Health Organization (PAHO) consider
that it is just a matter of time before cholera reaches Dominican territory,
and it is under these circumstances that the Public Health Ministry, welcoming
the recommendations of the the aforementioned international organization, has
endeavored into a series of actions to limit and control the spread of this
sickness. An expert's opinion published by _[Duarte
101](http://duarte101.com/2010/10/28/casos-de-colera-en-haiti/)_ [es]:

> Jon Andrus, subdirector de la OPS, dijo que, si bien no se han confirmado
> casos en República Dominicana, su despacho espera que se produzcan, “porque
> esa frontera es muy porosa. Al hablar de la eliminación de cualquier
> enfermedad en La Española, necesitamos hablar de planes que incluyan la isla
> entera”.

Jon Andrus, sub-director of PAHO, said that so far there are no confirmed
cases in the Dominican Republic, but his office expects them to appear,
“because the border is very porous. When we talk about eliminating any
sickness from Hispaniola we must talk about plans that include the whole
island.”

One of the first steps taken by the Public Health Ministry was the activation
of emergency commissions, especially those in border zones, where public
hospitals and their personnel have been reinforced with the idea that they can
respond adequately to eventual cholera cases originating in Haiti or Dominican
soil. Also, the government established a preventive and collaborative sanitary
cord in the border with Haiti which encompasses the delivery to this country
of many tons of chlorine to purify the water and also the dissemination of
basic information about cholera in English and Creole, along with radio spots
in both languages. The brochure that has been being distributed in the border
starts with the question “What is cholera?” (“Kisa kolera -a ye?” in Creole)
and mentions the main symptoms, the causes and the best way to prevent the
sickness.

[![](https://es.globalvoicesonline.org/wp-content/uploads/2010/10/Haiti-RD-
border-375x258.jpg)](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2010/11/01/dominican-
republic-taking-measures-against-cholera/india-ties-with-africa/)

Border between Haiti and Dominican Republic. Photo by Inside Disaster.*

Other measure taken by the Dominican authorities was the temporary closing of
the bi-national market, which was a motive for protests in Haiti, where
confusion about the sanitary situation reigns. Rull Fernández, of _[Duarte
101](http://duarte101.com/2010/10/26/estan-desinformados/#comments)_ [es], has
echoed this situation publishing declarations by doctor Anggie Serrano, who
expressed surprise about the apparent disinformation of Haitians:

> Lo que sí nos sorprende es que ellos se preguntan por qué tantos chequeos y
> porqué la suspensión del mercado. Nosotros entonces les decimos que han
> muerto muchos por el cólera y alegan que no saben nada de eso. Tal parece
> que estas personas no tienen acceso a la información.

What does surprise us is that they ask us why are there so many checks and why
the suspension of the market. We tell them that many people have died of
cholera and they claim that they do not know anything about that. It looks
like these people do not have access to the information.

The reaction that Serrano describes refers to the cautionary measures taken
around the border, where at the moment incoming cooked foods from Haiti are
prohibited and the passage of Haitians has been restricted to those that show
visas and are willing to submit to health checks taking place at the border,
where one of the first demands is that hands be washed.

The sanitary situation in Haiti has been gradually worsening since the 12th of
January this year, when [an earthquake with an intensity of 7.0 in the Richter
scale devastated the capital, killing more than 300 thousand people, and
submerged the nation in a profound state of
emergency](https://globalvoicesonline.org/specialcoverage/haiti-
earthquake-2010/). Despite the funds promised by the international community
and multiple meetings on the subject, Haiti still has not received this help,
with the consequence that those who lost their houses are still living in
improvised refuges where overcrowding and lack of hygiene reign. These two
causes have contributed to the apparition of this cholera outbreak.

In view of the protests for the closing on the bi-national market, the Public
Health Ministry reaffirmed yesterday that this was a temporary measure and
that for the moment it is authorized to reopen, as long as the hygiene
measures and controls established by the authorities are strictly followed.

Even when at the moment the first case of cholera in the Dominican territory
has not been detected, the measures continues to be reinforced and the
population is taking the situation very seriously. [ Al
Momento.net](http://www.almomento.net/news/127/ARTICLE/72097/2010-10-27.html)
[es] informs via Twitter that the precautionary measures are being extended to
the touristic areas, while [Elaine
Nivar](http://twitter.com/#!/Elainenivar/status/28916713650) [es] makes a call
to all Dominicans to be alert and take precautions. [Julissa
María](http://twitter.com/#!/julz_a/status/28916368124) [es] asks to pray for
those sick of cholera in Haiti, where [forecasts are not
encouraging](http://www.diariolibre.com/noticias_det.php?id=266136) [es]:
according to the World Health Organization (WHO) cholera has not reached its
peak point in Haiti, and it will be difficult to erradicate.

*Photo from the album [Inside Disaster](http://www.flickr.com/photos/insidedisaster/) in Flickr. Republished under [CC Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike 2.0 License](http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/2.0/).

