[![](http://www.antiracismfascism.org/images/stories/iranekdilosi.jpg)](http://www.antiracismfascism.org/index.php?option=com_content&view=article&id=211:2010-10-24-06-31-09&catid=38:press-
releases-announcements&Itemid=150)Twenty-five Iranian refugees in Athens,
Greece [have gone on hunger
strike](http://www.euronews.net/nocomment/2010/10/19/iranian-refugees-go-on-
hunger-strike-in-greece/) since October 14 demanding that Greek authorities
process their political asylum applications. Some have had their mouths sewn
shut.

A statement by the Iranian campaign group said they had been protesting
peacefully at the [Propylaia](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Propylaea) of
Athens for more than 44 days with no response when they [decided to begin the
hunger
strike](http://www.antiracismfascism.org/index.php?option=com_content&view=article&id=210:2010-10-19-06-38-39&catid=38:press-
releases-announcements&Itemid=150). They say they have been threatened by the
local authorities who want them to stop their public protest.

According to an article on _Antiracismfacism.org_ , Petros Konstantinou, an
anti-capitalist mayoral candidate also reported seeing Iranian embassy
employees [trying to harass the protesters and take
pictures](http://www.antiracismfascism.org/index.php?option=com_content&view=article&id=211:2010-10-24-06-31-09&catid=38:press-
releases-announcements&Itemid=150) [Gr].

The refugees and their supporters have used YouTube to broadcast their
message. There has been almost no media coverage in Greek mainstream media
about the hunger strike, but local activists groups and online media have been
showing support (the poster above is for a solidarity concert).

**Greek municipal police attacks hunger strikers**

This video from October 17 shows aggressive behavior against the Iranians by
the Greek municipal police.

**One refugee was sent to the hospital**

One of refugees, Masoud Faramarzi, was transported to the hospital after his
health deteriorated after days of hunger strike. On the tent we can read anti-
Iranian regime slogans such as “Down with Khamenei” (Iran's supreme leader).
The video is from October 16.

This video from the hunger strike was uploaded on October 18.

In July, a previous group of six Iranian hunger strikers demonstrated in front
of The UN Refugee Agency (UNHCR) offices in Athens, including one who had his
mouth sewn shut.

[Asteris Masouras ](https://globalvoicesonline.org/author/asteris-
masouras/)contributed to this post.

