In the 1990s Ronaldo Monteiro was convicted for extortion by kidnapping and
sentenced to 28 years in prison in Brazil. While serving his time, Monteiro
and some fellow inmates were concerned for the wellbeing of their families in
their absence. They responded to the situation by setting up a workshop inside
the jail where they recycled and sold paper. A portion of the profit went
towards improving their equipment, and the rest was shared among their
families. That's how project _Uma Chance_ (A Chance) started.

The [Center for Digital Inclusion](http://cdiglobal.org/) (CDI) began offering
short courses on information technology to detainees. Monteiro enrolled and
learned fast; he was soon invited to teach as well. The project expanded to
other penitentiaries, and family members were also invited to participate.

In this documentary by [Mixer Productions](http://www.mixer.com.br/), Monteiro
explains how he pursued a new path from inside jail and turned his life around
(subtitles in English):  
  

[![Event to celebrate the third year of ‘Growing up with Citizenship' at CISC.
Photo by Danny Silva, used with
permission.](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2011/09/DSC_2588-375x250.jpg)](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2011/10/17/brazil-
creating-opportunities-for-life-after-jail/dsc_2588/)

Event to celebrate the third year of ‘Growing up with Citizenship' at CISC.
Photo by Danny Silva, used with permission.

  
In 2002, while still incarcerated, Monteiro created the [Center of Social and
Cultural Integration](http://www.cisc-umachance.org.br/) known as CISC-Uma
Chance, which offers courses on IT and recycling to communities of Tribobó, in
[São
Gonçalo](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/S%C3%A3o_Gon%C3%A7alo,_Rio_de_Janeiro),
in Greater Rio de Janeiro. They work to make opportunities available to more
people, as CISC develops activities in cooking, citizen awareness, healthy
lifestyle and preparation for university.

In 2003, Monteiro was granted parole.

**New beginnings**

In 2006, Monteiro went one step further and created the impressive [Incubadora
de Empreendimentos para Egressos](http://www.iee-umachance.org.br/index.php)
(IEE) (Incubator of Small Businesses for Ex-Detainees). Aiming for social
reintegration of young offenders, detainees and former detainees, the
incubator fosters ideas with dynamic lessons on entrepreneurial skills and
management. The IEE seeks to break the cycle of repeat-offending by offering a
chance to men and women who are often turned down by society.

The project has earned support from Petrobras since 2006, and has partnered
with Ashoka, McKinsey & Company and several universities. Because of this
work, Monteiro was named an [Ashoka
fellow](http://www.ashoka.org/fellow/ronaldo-monteiro).

[![Ronaldo Monteiro talking to participants of IEE. Photo by Danny Silva, used
with permission](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2011/09/DSC_1563_1936x1296-375x251.jpg)](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2011/10/17/brazil-
creating-opportunities-for-life-after-jail/dsc_1563_1936x1296/)

Ronaldo Monteiro talking to participants of IEE. Photo by Danny Silva, used
with permission

As Monteiro says in the documentary above, serious projects “transform lives
and make men work” instead of resorting to crime and armed violence. In a
[TEDx
Sudeste](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=bmLN6eQgU8w&feature=player_embedded)
[pt] presentation in 2010, Monteiro explained that rehabilitation should
involve education, and opportunities and incentive for pursuing dreams.

The penitentiary system in Brazil has been repeatedly been a subject of
criticism by human rights groups. A
[report](http://www.amnesty.org/en/region/brazil/report-2010) by Amnesty
International in 2010 said detainees “continued to be held in cruel, inhuman
or degrading conditions”, often facing overcrowded facilities.

When detainees are released, they carry a heavy stigma, and harsh experiences
in jail hardly contribute to rehabilitation. But with the proper incentive and
inspiration, detainees may find options of new paths to rebuild their lives.

