The average Ukrainian woman is highly educated, yet earns about [30 percent
less](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Women' data-versionurl=) than the average
man in a similar position. She is more likely to become unemployed or not get
hired at all because she might get pregnant. Even if she has no children, she
is still carrying out the [majority of household
duties](http://www.rgd.org.ua/en/background/gender_equality/), which prevents
her career development. She also has a nearly [50-percent
chance](http://www.undp.org.ua/en/media/1-undp-news/1169-gene-of-equality-
short-films-contest-presented-in-kyiv-ukraine) of experiencing violence in her
home.

While the laws in Ukraine, including in the country’s constitution, establish
legal equality between the men and women, closing the gap between the
legislation and its implementation is a difficult task. However, traditional
attitudes and values are slowly changing, and ordinary citizens as well as
women's rights advocates, are playing an important role in this process. In
August 2010, for instance, over 1,000 people
[marched](http://eeas.europa.eu/delegations/ukraine/press_corner/all_news/news/2010/2010_08_02_01_en.htm)
[en] in Ukraine's capital Kyiv to condemn domestic violence, and hundreds of
volunteers joined the domestic violence awareness campaign.

**Video competition for young Ukranians**

From June 17 to September 10, 2011, a group of talented youth
[submitted](http://www.undp.org.ua/en/media/1-undp-news/1169-gene-of-equality-
short-films-contest-presented-in-kyiv-ukraine) [en] their entries to a short
film competition about gender called “Gene of Equality”. Participants had to
produce 5-minute films in one of two categories: “5 minutes of gender
equality” or “5 minutes on domestic violence prevention.” The competition is
sponsored by the United Nations Development Programme and the European Union
Delegation to Ukraine.

The winners will be selected by a jury, while short films will also be voted
on by YouTube users. Already, the online videos have been viewed nearly 50,000
times, and the best will be screened at the short gender film festival
scheduled to take place in Kyiv in October 2011.

Below is a selection of films that can be understood by speakers of any
language, and you can see more of the films submitted on the YouTube page,
[GenderTube](http://www.youtube.com/user/GenderTube).

**_“Violence in the family – a life ripped to pieces” – by “Infinity”_  
**

**_“Change your focus – don’t perceive a woman just as a sex object” – by
“Just a kilo”_  
**

**_“And What About Your Family?” – by “Divine Animators”_  
**

**_“Craftsmanship has no gender” – by “NONAME_GROUP”_  
**

