Yesterday, Prime Minister Najib Razak, who also holds the Finance portfolio,
unveiled the Budget 2011 that lays down the economic plans of the country for
the next few years.

Among the highlights of the Budget are: plans to build another six highways
and a 100-storey tower, implementing a Mass Rapid Transit (MRT) transportation
system in Kuala Lumpur, building new hospitals, increasing the number of
doctors, nurses and medical supplies as well as to enhance English and Bahasa
Malaysia proficiency.

Although the Prime Minister had obtained wishlists from citizens in his blog,
overall feedback on the budget has been largely negative.

Blogger [I Am
Malaysian](http://malaysianpolitics.wordpress.com/2010/10/16/budget-2011-100-storey-
tower/) is just one of many who do not see the need to build a 100-storey
tower:

> Everybody wants a tallest tower. So we should do it too. Oh, but wait, there
> is definitely no way we will be building the tallest tower with this
> 100-storey building, because Burj Khalifa is more than 160 storeys high. So
> since weâ€™re not in it to break any world records this time round, why are we
> doing this again?

Blogger James Ooi also
[lamented](http://blog.1meow.com/2010/10/15/a-disappointing-budget-2011/) that
despite the proposal to turn the country into a high income economy, he feels
that with inflation his purchasing power is constantly decreasing.

However, blogger Eric Yong felt that the Budget was going in the right
direction.

> **It does seem like it is very encouraging for the country's economy. With
> the region's outlook looking sluggish, Malaysia would be pretty ambitious to
> be announcing quite a massive budget, but this is quite an achievable target
> as well.**

The full text of the Prime Minister's speech can be found
[here](http://thestar.com.my/news/story.asp?file=/2010/10/15/budget/20101015174503&sec=budget),
and the highlights of Budget 2011 can be found
[here](http://thestar.com.my/news/story.asp?file=/2010/10/15/budget/20101015160648&sec=budget).

Thumbnail is from the Flickr page of
[~ezs](http://www.flickr.com/photos/missizss/2469854643/sizes/s/) used under
CC License Attribution 2.0 Generic

