In the summer of 2010, [when peat fires spread across
Russia](https://globalvoicesonline.org/specialcoverage/2010-special-
coverage/russia-wildfires-2010/), choking and suffocating villages, Internet
activists got organized. While the Russian government response was slow and
piecemeal, bloggers responded by quickly launching the site [Russian-
Fires](http://russian-fires.ru/) [ru], which allowed Internet users in small
towns to relay information about where fires were still burning and what
supplies were needed.

The site was immensely popular, at one point [experiencing upto 17,000 unique
visitors a day](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2010/08/10/russia-russian-
fires-ru-the-first-ushahidi-experience/).

When the crisis was over, the bloggers behind the project – Anastasia
Severina, [Alexey Sidorenko](https://globalvoicesonline.org/author/alexey-
sidorenko/), Lev Zvyagintsev, Valery Ilyichev, and [Gregory
Asmolov](https://globalvoicesonline.org/author/gregory-asmolov/) – noticed
that the website was still buzzing with activity. Users continued to send
messages about other problems and needs in their towns.

“People saw that it was an effective platform for sending help when and where
it was needed,” says Severina.

![Website "Virtual Alarm" maps alerts for help and need, and then coordinates
locals to respond.](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2011/09/Picture-2-375x251.png)

Website "Virtual Alarm" maps alerts for help and need, and then coordinates
locals to respond.

**Connecting people in new ways**

Inspired by the success of [Russian-Fires](http://russian-fires.ru/) [ru], the
bloggers developed a new site – [Rynda.org](http://www.rynda.org) (Virtual
Alarm) – which currently consists of three maps: a “General Map”, a “Fire
Map”, and a “Blood Donation” map.

The locations of people who have sent requests are indicated in red, while
offers to help are in green. Severina says they have tried to make the site as
simple as possible, so that people, “who have no idea how to operate a
computer can go to the page and see two buttons: ‘I need help’ or ‘I want to
help.’”

The site team in Moscow does not physically transport or receive goods.
Instead, Virtual Alarm connects people who live in the same city, with those
who have what they need.

“Let’s say a mother needs supplies, like clothing for her children. It makes
no sense to send clothes from an NGO in Moscow to Vladivostok,” Severina
explains. Instead, alerts for help or need are marked on a map, and people
registered as willing to help are notified of new requests via email.

After about two weeks, they follow up on any outstanding alerts to make sure
someone has responded to the call for help.

**Mapping blood donors**

The newest map on Virtual Alarm charts blood donation and blood banks
throughout Russia. The map marks donation centers, and also connects those who
need blood donations with donors of the same blood type nearby. Registered
users can also leave comments about their experience donating blood, which
Severina hopes will help show people how easy and necessary it is to donate
blood at least once a year.

[![A woman donates blood](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2011/09/donatingbloodrussia-375x281.png)](http://www.yadonor.ru/)

An image from Russian ministry of health site encouraging citizens to donate
blood.

[According to 2010
statistics](http://www.rosbalt.ru/piter/2010/08/07/760307.html) [ru], only 13
out of every 1,000 people in Russia donate blood every year, in comparison
with rates 3-4 times as high in Europe and the United States. The Russian
Ministry of Health and Social Development say they need to reach a rate of [at
least 25 out of 1,000 people](http://www.yadonor.ru/ru/service/program/) [ru]
in order for hospitals and clinics to function adequately.

The ministry has recently launched a hotline number and website called “[I'm a
donor](http://www.yadonor.ru/)” (Yadonor.ru) to inform the public and make
blood donation easier.

In the near future, Rynda hopes to partner with local businesses in order to
offer registered users small rewards – like discounts or movies tickets – as a
thank you for volunteering.

As far as the future uses of the map, Severina says, “If, God forbid,
something should happen, and some new crisis should arise, we would make a new
map and connect people.”

