The [One Day on Earth project ](http://www.onedayonearth.org/)is only a day
away, a day where people from all over the planet will record videos during
that day, send them in, and they will become part of a documentary film and
experience that will represent a snapshot of humankind.

[![](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2010/10/odoe-100x100.jpg)People from all over the world have
](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-content/uploads/2010/10/odoe.jpg)[signed
up](http://www.onedayonearth.org/main/authorization/signUp) to be a part of
this experience, and many have created or joined one of the 495 groups and
communities that have cropped up around the event: from [parents to
be](http://www.onedayonearth.org/group/givingbirthon101010), to[
weddings](http://www.onedayonearth.org/group/weddingson101010), to[
teachers](http://www.onedayonearth.org/group/educatorsononedayonearth), and
groups around a specific country or location. Although more than 10,000 people
have already signed up, there are still some countries with low representation
for the event, and the organizers have posted a shout out for anyone to join
or invite others who live in one of [the countries
](http://www.onedayonearth.org/page/help-odoe-reach-out)to join in and be a
part of the experience.

Their [promotional video](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=K6JduEGpHE0) seems to
bring a little sample of what this day long documentary could be, and one can
only imagine what the editing process for all the footage will be like:

There still is time to sign up and join the event, and Matt Lambert from
[_Motionographer_ ](http://motionographer.com/2010/10/04/one-day-on-
earth-101010-approaches/)blog sums up the results nicely:

> The results of this project will be a shared archive of video — downloadable
> for non-commercial use by participants for creative and educational purposes
> — a feature film, and a community of filmmakers and inspired citizens
> dedicated to exploring our global identity via a shared media event.

However,[ according to this next
clip](http://dotsub.com/view/d7f3caed-c6e7-43ec-b311-59b936e217cd), to be able
to access this trove of knowledge you will need to upload a 1 minute video
during 10.10.10. So don't miss the chance!

