Election day finally arrives on the 3rd of October for more than 135 million
voters in Brazil, after a heated three month period of electoral campaign.
Many Brazilian citizens have followed the motto “DIY: Clean Elections” by
monitoring the tactics adopted by supporters of the candidates for
Presidential and General elections. Today, the 1st of October, bloggers from
all over the country unite in a collective blogging initiative, expressing
their “netcitizenship” and demanding [clean
elections](http://blog.eleitor2010.com/2010/09/24/blogagem-coletiva-eleicoes-
limpas/) [pt]. The initiative is promoted by
[Eleitor2010](http://eleitor2010.com/) and represents the culmination of
twelve weeks of the campaign during which Brazilians have taken a stand on
social media and denounced more than eight hundred cases of [electoral
crimes](http://eleitor2010.com/page/index/7) [pt].

[![Photo from blog Voce Suja Minha Cidade, Eu Sujo seu Rosto \(You dirty my
city, I dirty your face\)](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2010/10/eleitor-
posters-375x264.jpg)](http://sujosuacara.tumblr.com/post/1199018625/mais-
santinhos-emporcalhando-o-parana)

Photo from blog Voce Suja Minha Cidade, Eu Sujo seu Rosto (You dirty my city,
I dirty your face)

[Elections](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Elections_in_Brazil) happen every two
years in Brazil. This year, citizens are deciding who will be the next
President of the Republic, as well as all 513[ Chamber of
Deputies](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Chamber_of_Deputies_of_Brazil) seats
and fifty-four of the[ Federal
Senate](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Senate_of_Brazil) seats, along with[
governorships](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Governor#Brazil) and[ state
legislatures](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/States_of_Brazil) of all[ 26
states](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/States_of_Brazil) and the[ Federal
District](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Distrito_Federal,_Brazil). A second
round will be held on October 31 if a candidate for President or Governor
fails to achieve more than half of the valid votes.

[Lula da Silva](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Luiz_In%C3%A1cio_Lula_da_Silva)
was a charismatic Chief of State who served two four-year terms, elected in
2002 and 2006, by majority vote. His successor candidate, [Dilma
Roussef](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dilma_Rousseff), is running ahead in the
polls, followed by social-democrat [José
Serra](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Jos%C3%A9_Serra), and the former minister
of Environment [Marina Silva](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Marina_Silva).
There are six other candidates for President.

[![](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2010/10/placaporca.jpg)](http://www.placaporca.com/)

Placa Porca (Dirty Board, pt) promotes art to denounce electoral crimes
related to the garbage created by political ads in public spaces.

The campaign strategies that candidates and their supporters have adopted
often left much to be desired from a legal standpoint. Several online
initiatives have monitored the electoral campaign, such as Knight Center’s
[map ](http://knightcenter.utexas.edu/blog/knight-center-publishes-map-
electoral-censorship-brazil)[of electoral censorship in
Brazil](http://knightcenter.utexas.edu/blog/knight-center-publishes-map-
electoral-censorship-brazil), [Placa Porca](http://www.placaporca.com/)‘s map
of artistic interventions on election posters in São Paulo and Eleitor2010.
**** The doors have opened for what could be a new paradigm of participatory
citizenship, where citizens make their voices heard concerning the way
politics happen in Brazil. From [political propaganda in
churches](http://eleitor2010.com/reports/view/96) [pt] to [bribed
tweets](http://eleitor2010.com/reports/view/234) [pt] and [vote
buying](http://eleitor2010.com/reports/view/866) [pt] candidates often simply
ignore how Brazilian law restricts campaigning, but some citizens do not let
it go unchallenged.

Such is the case of Deputy Chamber candidate Edmar Moreira, who has once again
brought an old story back into the spotlight. A [Global Voices
post](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2009/02/14/a-falling-castle-in-two-acts/)
from the beginning of 2009, gathered bloggers reactions to the fact that
Moreira, former Vice-President and Ethics Magistrate of the Brazilian Chamber
of Deputies, has a medieval-style castle in the state of Minas Gerais, that
the tax office does not know about. “Will he be investigated?” Apparently not,
as he is once again running for office in this year’s elections even though
“Mona Lisa Castle” still has not been declared at its full value, and [neither
have pending cases against him been
decided](http://transparencia.ig.com.br/@casa.php?id=111&cs=1) [pt]. The [case
was submitted to Eleitor2010](http://eleitor2010.com/reports/view/625), and
netcitizens have confirmed that also his son Leonardo Moreira, is running for
State Deputy

> A candidatura desse indivíduo é uma vergonha e uma afronta a todos nos, e se
> repararem bem, ele não declara este bem em sua inscrição.

The candidacy of this individual is a shame and an affront to us all, and if
you take a good look, he does not declare this asset [the Castle] in his
registration [as a candidate].

Other candidates have been accused of organizing “showmicios”, show-rallies,
for the sake of entertainment. Too bad that the law doesn’t approve candidates
sponsorship for that kind of events before the elections. A [citizen report
denounced Gony Arruda](http://eleitor2010.com/reports/view/548)’s gathering in
a [Reggae Club](http://yfrog.com/f/mrs57cj/) [pt]

> Só que Gony Arruda é candidato a deputado estadual do Ceará pelo PSDB, e o
> convite estampa bem grande o nome e o número do sujeito, o que caracteriza
> showmício. Que estão acontecendo showmícios não é surpresa, mas que cara de
> pau fazer isso assim, às claras no twitter e por email!

It is just that Gony Arruda is a deputy candidate for the state of Ceara by
PSDB, and the invitation stamps the individual’s name and number really big,
what characterizes this as a showmicio [show-rally]. It is no surprise that
showmicios are happening, but what a nerve doing it so explicitly on twitter
and by email!

[![Screenshot from a video that testifies a buying vote scheme assembled in
Rio Verde / Goiás, denounced on
Eleitor2010](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2010/10/eleitor2010-Goias.png)](http://eleitor2010.com/reports/view/866)

Screenshot from a video that testifies a buying vote scheme assembled in Rio
Verde / Goiás, denounced on Eleitor2010

The circulation of spam messages has been a recurrent electoral crime.
Citizens complain about how their personal information has gotten into the
hands of spammer candidates. [Mainstream
media](http://www.estadao.com.br/noticias/vidae,estudantes-acusam-candidato-
de-usar-banco-de-dados-do-prouni,604170,0.htm) [pt] covered the story of
students whose personal data had been taken out from
[ProUni](http://prouniportal.mec.gov.br/), a governmental information system
from the Ministry of Education and misused for online campaign. [Ibrahim
Cesar](http://ibrahimcesar.com/) reported the incident and
[writes](http://eleitor2010.com/reports/view/298) about his worries [pt]

> Ora, o que isso significa? O órgão governamental que controla o programa
> cedeu meu endereço eletrônico para a campanha deste sujeito que não merece
> ser eleito. Meus dados. Conseguem entender isso? O ProUNI tem toda a minha
> informação financeira e de toda minha família. Para receber o benefício você
> é obrigado a agregar centenas de certidões, documentos, etc. Que outros usos
> podem fazer destes meus dados? Sinto-me como se meus direitos civis não
> valessem nada para essa administração.

So, what does this mean? The governmental body that controls the program has
given my electronic address for the campaign of this individual who doesn’t
deserve to be elected. My data. Can you understand that? ProUNI has all my
financial data and all my family’s. To get student subsidies, you must bring
together hundreds of certificates, documents, etc. How else can they use this
data of mine? I feel as though my civil rights were worth nothing for this
administration.

Though mainstream media has broadcasted some [bizarre
strategies](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=7DPBLaq6-Lc) adopted by the
politicians to gain voters, [social
media](http://eleitor2010.com/reports/?c=58) has been a true cluster for
electoral crimes in Brazil. At the same time, social media has also played a
major role in providing expression spaces for citizen participation in the
processes of democracy.

A collaborative coverage of elections on the web will be brought by _[48h
Democracia](http://48hdemocracia.com.br/)_ [48h Democracy, pt]. They aim to
bring video, news reports and bulletins from netcitizens of all over the
country and give a different perspective of the elections from the mainstream
media.

This article was proofread by [Janet
Gunter](https://globalvoicesonline.org/author/janet-gunter/).

