Brazil’s electoral law reform, approved in 2009, will have a positive impact
on the October 2010 general election by giving citizens access to more
information than ever before. Furthermore, many emerging transparency projects
from civil society, the private sector and the public sector are working
together, actively using new technology tools to make the election visible and
to get citizens involved in the upcoming celebration of democracy.

Next October, about [135
million](http://www.tse.gov.br/internet/eleicoes/regi_uf_blank.htm) [pt]
Brazilians will vote for president, governor, senator, federal and state or
district deputies. Last year, the [Electoral
Reform](http://www.planalto.gov.br/ccivil_03/_Ato2007-2010/2009/Lei/L12034.htm)
[pt] opened the doors for politics 2.0 by authorizing parties to use social
networks (Twitter, Facebook and others) to raise campaign donations and
participate in streamlined debates.

Before the elections, multiple projects were already working on issues such as
transparency, civic engagement and public policies monitors. Google created an
[election platform](http://www.google.com.br/eleicoes2010/) [pt], compiling
information about presidential candidates and displaying an interactive map
showing election results since 1994, as well as bringing together the most
active civil society initiatives: [Campanha Ficha
Limpa](http://www.fichalimpa.org.br/) (“No Criminal Record Campaign”),
[Excelências](http://www.excelencias.org.br/) (“Excellences”), [Movimento Voto
Consciente](http://www.votoconsciente.org.br/) (“Conscientious Vote
Movement”), [VotenaWeb](http://votenaweb.com.br/) (“Vote on the Web”), and
[Eleitor 2010](http://eleitor2010.com/) (“Elector 2010”).

Google’s platform encourages voters to ask questions to their candidates by
submitting them via a [YouTube
channel](http://www.youtube.com/eleicoes?gl=BR&hl=pt). The best questions, as
chosen by the platform users, will be answered by candidates on television.

[Paula Góes](https://globalvoicesonline.org/author/paulagoes/), Global Voices’
Multi-Lingual Editor, [wrote
about](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2010/04/07/brazil-blogosphere-in-
support-of-anti-corruption-bill/) Campanha Ficha Limpa: “The Ficha Limpa (No
Criminal Record) bill…seeks to prevent politicians who have committed serious
crimes, such as misuse of public funds, corruption, murder and drug
trafficking, from running in elections.” The [Movimento de Combate à Corrupção
Eleitoral](http://www.mcce.org.br/node/125) [Movement Against Electoral
Corruption] created the campaign in 2008 and prepared a bill (in Brazil, the
citizens can propose a bill if they obtain a certain number of signatures).
[Avaaz.org](http://avaaz.org/) played an important role in collecting
signatures and putting pressure on the legislature to approve the bill. The
Ficha Limpa Law was enacted by president Luiz Inácio Lula in June 2010.

The Superior Electoral Court ruled that the Ficha Limpa Law is valid and
enforceable for the 2010 elections. After that decision, the founders of the
campaign launched a website to monitor candidates’ compliance with the law,
with additional features like visualizing gathered data and news from the
media. The site also includes a form to report candidate misbehavior.

If a candidate wants to be listed on the Ficha Limpa site, he or she must
fulfill a pledge of transparency during the campaign by presenting a weekly
report on his or her spending and other information. Forty candidates have
already registered.

Voto Consciente is an association that was founded in 1987. The objective is
to consolidate citizen participation by informing the public about politicians
and their competencies. They also have a website to present that information
and news about the association. They have many online activities, such as
participation in social networks, publications and videos. For example, the
[movement in the city of Jundiai](https://twitter.com/votojundiai) published a
[document](http://votoconscientejundiai.com.br/ficha-publica/) about 16
candidates for state deputy and information about how citizens can use the
Internet to supervise politicians or propose solutions for their city’s
problems.

The other projects presented in Google’s platform have been documented as case
studies on the [Technology for Transparency
Network](https://transparency.globalvoicesonline.org). VotenaWeb was studied
in the first phase of our research, while Excelências and Eleitor 2010 will be
presented in the coming weeks.

[Votenaweb](https://transparency.globalvoicesonline.org/project/votenaweb)
allows citizens to compare their votes on congressional bills with the
politicians’. Using a clear interface, congressional bills are translated into
simple language with clearly defined context and consequences. In addition to
monitoring the voting records on particular bills, users can also interact
with the political landscape by symbolically voting for or against each bill.
This tool helps citizens choose who to vote for by enabling them to find
candidates’ voting records in recent years.

[Excelências](http://www.excelencias.org.br/) was created in 2006 by
[Transparência Brasil](http://www.transparencia.org.br/index.html)
(“Transparency Brazil”). Excelências uses the Internet to make information
about Brazilian parliamentarians available to the public. They use official
data to increase transparency surrounding 2368 politicians. As with VotenaWeb,
Excelências helps inform citizens about the candidates in the 2010 elections.

[![](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2010/09/brazil_elections-375x281.jpg)](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2010/09/brazil_elections.jpg)

