Corruption is rampant in Bangladesh. In 2009, the country ranked 139 out of
180 in Transparency International's [Corruption Perceptions
Index](http://www.transparency.org/policy_research/surveys_indices/cpi/2009/cpi_2009_table).
Of the various sectors in Bangladesh that are affected by corruption, the Land
Management System is among the worst. Corruption has been highlighted as [the
main reason](http://www.bdnews24.com/details.php?id=150899&cid=2) behind slow,
poor quality and faulty land related services in the country.

Given the absence of a transparent system, bribery and other irregularities
are common. People in the administration who are responsible for creating and
maintaining land records [often prepare incorrect
records](http://www.undp.org.bd/library/newsletter/Policy%20Bulletin%205.pdf)
intentionally, and land owners are forced to pay bribes to officials to get
the records approved. Officials and surveyors are often in cahoots with touts
and land sharks; cases abound where people have paid bribes to officials
and/or surveyors and gotten [land ownership transferred/recorded
illegally](http://www.spotlightradio.net/listen/land-ownership-bangladesh/) in
their names, leaving the real owner(s) running pillar to post to get justice.
In 2006 alone, [bribes worth about 83 billion Bangladeshi Taka were
paid](http://www.digitalbangladesh.gov.bd/blog.php?ID=350) for land related
services such as registration and altering of records.

Over 3.2 million land-related cases are pending before the judiciary in
Bangladesh. This huge figure does not take into account the large number of
the aggrieved who do not feel empowered enough to approach the courts for
litigation. Land disputes often lead to violence and criminal offenses. It is
said that 80 percent of criminal offenses today stem from land disputes.

To deal with these problems of fraud and corruption, the government is working
to [digitize the land
records](http://southasia.oneworld.net/ictsfordevelopment/bangladesh-to-
digitise-land-records) and the land management system to [infuse some level of
transparency and accountability into the
sector](http://www.thefinancialexpress-bd.com/more.php?news_id=80727) and curb
the rampant corruption. Currently, a digital database has been created for
Dhaka city, and [over 0.42 million land records have been
uploaded](http://www.thefinancialexpress-bd.com/more.php?news_id=98468) into
the database, which is soon to be inaugurated by the Prime Minister Sheikh
Hasina. Other initiatives, either private or public sector led, are being
actively considered. For example, Terra Tech Ltd, a conglomerate of 10 local
IT Companies, has proposed a [digital mapping and land revenue management
system](http://www.thedailystar.net/newDesign/news-details.php?nid=128155),
which has received the green light from the government. The department hopes
that these initiatives will be steps in the right direction for implementing
the government's [Vision 2021 of a Digital
Bangladesh](http://www.thefinancialexpress-bd.com/2009/02/08/58247.html) and
will usher in a more effective land management system in Bangladesh.

However, concerns have been raised regarding the limited success of past
endeavors, which were localized and used different assumptions and follow-up
actions. There is a growing realization and acknowledgment of the fact that
isolated initiatives will not do much good. A consolidated plan has to be
worked out under the [public-private partnership
(PPP)](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Public%E2%80%93private_partnership)
umbrella. In a [recent
dialogue](http://www.digitalbangladesh.gov.bd/blog.php?ID=344) [BN] on the
effective use of ICT in the arena of Land Management, the Assistant Country
Director of [UNDP Bangladesh](http://www.undp.org.bd/index.php?cal=c), Mr.
K.A.M Morshed, presented a paper titled [“Strategic Priorities of Digital
Bangladesh: Land”](http://www.digitalbangladesh.gov.bd/documents/Land.ppt),
which stressed the need for a correct database through proper surveys, the
creation of digital land zoning systems (namely GIS based maps with zones), a
digital land registration system, and an up-to-date digital land information
system integrated with the voter/national ID database that would offer easy
access, search and verification facilities, and a digital land revenue
tracking and management system.

In one of his articles on [Digital Land
Systems](http://blogymate.com/post.aspx?BlogID=880&t=%E0%A6%A1%E0%A6%BF%E0%A6%9C%E0%A6%BF%E0%A6%9F%E0%A6%BE%E0%A6%B2-%E0%A6%AD%E0%A7%82%E0%A6%AE%E0%A6%BF-%E0%A6%AC%E0%A7%8D%E0%A6%AF%E0%A6%AC%E0%A6%B8%E0%A7%8D%E0%A6%A5%E0%A6%BE--%E0%A5%A5-%E0%A6%A6%E0%A7%81%E0%A6%87-%E0%A5%A5)
[BN] on the blog [Blogymate](http://blogymate.com), Mustafa Jabbar, who is the
proprietor of the Bijoy Bangla software and keyboard in Bangladesh, has
pointed out that the mere digitization of land records will not be enough to
achieve transparency and accountability. According to him, a complete overhaul
of the land related laws and the current mechanism of service delivery is
needed, as the current system is pretty much archaic. Mr. Jabbar states that
the new, automated land information system should have an integrated approach
so that a person searching the database can get all information pertaining to
the land at one glance: ownership, registration, mutation, transfer, disputes,
judicial cases, land map, taxes paid and pending, land related wills and such
other legal documents. Furthermore, he feels that having all of this
information is not enough. It needs to be made accessible to people in an
easy, user-friendly manner, not only via the Internet but through the
telephony system as well. According to him, just as a consumer can now access
his/ her telephone bill from home through the interactive voice response
system, it should be as easy for a person to access land related information.

There is a lot of hope riding on the effective use of ICT in the Land
Management System of Bangladesh to usher in modernization, user-friendliness,
transparency and accountability in this very important sector.

