[![](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2010/09/283491680_9930294717_s.jpg)](http://www.flickr.com/photos/aalarcon/283491680/in/photostream/)Venezuelans
will be voting on September 26th to renew the whole body of the [National
Assembly](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/National_Assembly_of_Venezuela), the
unicameral legislative body which substituted the Congress, and online, dozens
of people are making and remixing videos urging citizens to vote.

[_Los Hermanos Electorales_](http://www.youtube.com/user/helectorales), or the
Electoral Brothers have a series of four videos portraying different
situations that evolve into songs about the importance of voting as a way to
make decisions regarding violence, freedom of expression, the economy and the
food shortages. [Their latest
video](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=mvjPaAGdrLc) takes the subject of
insecurity, muggings and kidnappings that are affecting Venezuelans lately and
mixes it with a catchy _reggaeton_ rhythm and sexy dancing girls who send the
message that to have a chance at improving the situation, you need to vote.

The [Quetelleva2010](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=tbyjnI5JSD4) (What gets
you in Spanish) video is a darker take on the same subject of insecurity. A
kidnapping victim is terrorized throughout the night as he's driven around the
city in order to empty out his bank account, and as he's dropped off at the
voting center the viewer is asked: if insecurity doesn't get you to vote, then
what gets you?

[Voto Joven ](http://votojoven.com)has a different campaign, insisting that
regardless of your position, in favor or in opposition of the government,
voting is necessary. So they give [26 reasons to vote on the
26th](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=CUdz-ER569g):

This[ next video](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=T4k1GBDWqOo) asks Venezuelans
to consider if they are voting or throwing their vote in the trash, a play on
words in Spanish between _votar_ which means to vote, and _botar_ which means
to throw away:

Other videos, like the one titled [Reasons to Vote in
Venezuela](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=QlgAQoG2V2A) support a particular
group of candidates, like this next one in favor of _The Democratic
Alternative,_ which asks voters to keep Venezuela from following in Cuba's
footsteps :

Not only are original videos showing up, but also remixes, [like this one
](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=WIbi_sAF1f0)adapted from a US voting
registration campaign. While the audio is still the same, the subtitles
reflect the Venezuelan reality: instead of prompting people to register to
vote, it asks them to get informed before voting, and points them towards the
[_Cartelera Electoral_ blog](http://carteleraelectoral.blogspot.com/).

These campaigns aim to improve abstentionism within the young people, who are
the main consumers of online media: [according to this
video](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=EQka3MzdyH0), back in the 2000
parliamentary elections, 75% of the young voters didn't vote. Let's hope that
number is much, much lower this year.

Thumbnail of [Venezuelan
Flag](http://www.flickr.com/photos/aalarcon/283491680/in/photostream/) by
[Alejandro Andres Alarcon](http://www.flickr.com/photos/aalarcon/) used
according to [CC Attribution
license.](http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0/deed.en)

