A global online community of scientists have recently emerged as an
influential and important contributor to worldwide journalism about science.
They have grown more sophisticated in their communications, now catching the
attention of journalists who were previously dismissive of citizen media about
science.

[![Scienceblogging.org](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2010/09/scienceblogging-
logo.png)](http://scienceblogging.org/)In August, a trio of science bloggers
launched [Scienceblogging.org](http://scienceblogging.org/), a comprehensive
aggregator of content from science blogs across the globe. The site features
links to content from mainstream science media as well as independent networks
of bloggers. It currently features 57 feeds that include several hundred
blogs. While the content is predominantly American, the aggregator also
features networks from China, Brazil, Germany, New Zealand, Belgium, Canada,
and France. The aggregator was built by the creators of the annual
ScienceOnline conference – [Bora Zivkovic](http://twitter.com/boraz), [Anton
Zuiker](http://twitter.com/mistersugar), and [Dave
Munger](http://twitter.com/davemunger).

[ScienceOnline2010](http://scienceonline2010.com/index.php/wiki
"ScienceOnline2010"), billed as “the fourth annual conference on science and
the Web,” took place from January 14 to January 17 at [Sigma
Xi](http://www.sigmaxi.org "Sigma Xi") in Research Triangle Park, North
Carolina. The conference has grown in size and popularity each year, and the
2010 conference attracted science bloggers from ten countries. In a display of
increased acceptance and legitimacy, the January conference featured
presentations and attendance from journalists representing several mainstream
media organizations, such as Reuters, BBC, and The New York Times. A similar
conference with different organizers, [Science Online
London](http://www.scienceonlinelondon.org/), took place in September this
year.

Science blogging is by no means a new phenomenon. Bora Zivkovic says he has
seen the science blogging community grow and thrive over the past decade,
earning more than a few converts from mainstream media.

“As journalists lost jobs, they took up blogging,” says Zivkovic, noting that
professional media are also increasingly creating blogs on their own websites.

In this video interview by [bkthrough](http://www.youtube.com/user/bkthrough)
on YouTube, Zivkovic comments on how ScienceOnline has grown and how the
conference agenda has moved from merely discussing blogging to other forms of
online activity as well.

Interestingly, one of the major discussion topics of the conference was the
lapses in accuracy sometimes made by mainstream journalists when reporting on
science issues. Several scientists and science bloggers expressed frustration
with the constraints mainstream journalism places on science-based
communication, such as the need to summarize complex issues into 20-second
“sound bites.” Another important topic was the need for scientists to become
better communicators and try to make their work more accessible and
understandable to a wider audience.

Many science bloggers are actively trying to expand their community beyond
academia. Darlene Cavalier, an advocate for science literacy and the author of
a blog called [Science Cheerleader](http://sciencecheerleader.com "Science
Cheerleader") is also the founder of a website called [Science for
Citizens](http://www.scienceforcitizens.net/ "Science for Citizens") that aims
to be a resource for people who want to participate in “citizen science” –
projects run by professional researchers that leverage volunteers to help with
research tasks such as data collection or computation. Professional
researchers can also promote their projects and recruit volunteers at the
site. While the site is currently available only in English, Cavalier said
projects are open to people in all countries and she hopes to offer the site
in other languages in the future.

The ScienceOnline organizers have announced plans to hold an even bigger
conference in 2011 in Research Triangle Park. Meanwhile, Zivkovic sees the
skepticism that mainstream journalists once held toward bloggers starting to
change a bit.

“The curmudgeon journalists who write ‘you'll miss us when we're gone’ Luddite
pieces cannot write about blogs that way any more,” he says. “They are now
reserving their snark, often using the exactly same old cliches they used
about blogs five years ago, to denigrate Twitter.”

_[Disclosure: I work for a company that served as a sponsor for the
ScienceOnline 2010 conference]_

