On 7 November, Azerbaijan will once again head to the polls to cast their
ballots in the upcoming parliamentary elections although actual pre-election
campaigning won't officially start until 23 days before voting day itself. The
period is five days shorter than previous elections after controversial
changes to the electoral code passed in June.

However, there are already some signs of activity on _Facebook_.

Erkin Gedirli, a lawyer by profession and [also a
blogger](http://erkin13.blogspot.com/), is among the few using the popular
social networking site so far. Shortly after his decision to run for
parliament he [created a _Facebook_
group](http://www.facebook.com/group.php?gid=132385643466167&ref=ts) [AZ]. So
far it has 416 members and its purpose is to keep people updated on the
election process, the campaign, and to respond to any questions and concerns.

![](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2010/09/Screenshot-19.png)

The group was created in July of this year and has not been without
controversy. Shortly after Gedirli's _Facebook_ page was launched, the
Secretary of the Central Election Commission, Natiq Mammadov, raised concerns
with what he argued was the start of a campaign before the official pre-
election period begins.

The accusation raises some questions about the use of new and social media
during this election period. For example, as Gedirli is not yet officially
registered as a candidate, the use of social media at this stage can perhaps
be considered a gray area open to interpretation and debate, and likely by the
authorities.

This is especially true given that many political figures have had their own
personal _Facebook_ pages which they use to reach out to supporters for some
time.

Nevertheless, as freedom of expression and the media [remains a significant
issue in Azerbaijan](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2010/09/13/azerbaijan-
freedom-of-expression-a-pressing-concern/), especially since the ban on
foreign radio station broadcasts by the _BBC_ , _VOA_ and _RFE/RL_ at the
beginning of 2009, there could well be more activity online instead.

Such a development might also put the continued use of new and social media by
activists back in the spotlight, especially if it can somehow partly offer an
alternative to governmental control of the mass media during elections which
to date have not been judged free and fair by international observers.

Around 170,000 people in Azerbaijan use _Facebook_ according the site's own
estimates based on actual connections. According to those figures, most are
young Azerbaijanis aged 18-30.

![](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2010/09/Screenshot-211.png)

For now, another likely candidate, political analyst and figure Ilgar
Mammadov, has also [launched his own
page](http://www.facebook.com/group.php?gid=135421166488943) [AZ]. Mammadov is
a colleague of Gedirli in RE-AL (Republican Alternatives) which also [has its
own blog](http://real.cumhuriyetci.biz/), as [does
he](http://ilgarmammadov.livejournal.com/). He also tweets at
[@ilgarmammadov](http://twitter.com/ilgarmammadov).

![](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2010/09/Screenshot-221-e1284666231446.png)

