[ _This post was originally published on[Ushahidi's
blog](http://blog.ushahidi.com/index.php/2010/09/03/brazil-diy-clean-
elections/). Ushahidi is an open-source mapping tool that was developed in
Kenya at a time of crisis in 2008 and has since been used for crowdsourcing
worldwide._]

School children being told to chant candidates’ names by their teachers. Civil
servants getting sacked for not campaigning for their political bosses. Zinc
roofing being traded for votes. The public wholesaling of voters’ personal
data to campaigners. Death threats to those who denounce electoral crimes.

Welcome to the unpleasant side of Brazilian electioneering.

These are just some of the reports coming from [Eleitor
2010](http://eleitor2010.com/), a “crowdsourcing” project aiming to facilitate
citizen reports of abuses of the electoral process in Brazil.

In the largest democracy in Latin America – with over 120 million voters –
this year, voters go to the polls they will be choosing the successor of one
of the country's most popular Presidents in history (Luiz Inácio “Lula” da
Silva) but also voting on governors, a large portion of Congress.

[![](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2010/09/eleitor-375x274.png)](http://eleitor2010.com/)

Eleitor2010 website

Every country has its own unique political culture and oddities. Even the most
minimal democracy has its own rules around electioneering, the mechanics of
the vote, and ensuring that the state regulates the electoral process.

Brazil was one of the first democracies of its size to use electronic voting
machines. It also has compulsory voting. But other aspects of its electoral
process are unique, including attempts to strictly regulate of online
campaigning, vote buying and what are called “showmícios” (concert-rallies).

Brazil has very clear and comprehensive laws regulating elections but the
problem is enforcing these laws.

There is a real culture of politicians subverting the law, maintaining a
privileged position as patrons of voters in Brazil. This stems from a distant
colonial past and continued persistent inequality, where entrenched elite
interests have maintained themselves.

The idea behind [Eleitor 2010](http://eleitor2010.com/), which is a purely
volunteer, non-partisan project run by a virtual team with zero funding, is to
engage the voter beyond the day of the election. According to Paula Góes and
Diego Casaes, its creators – who met via Twitter and now collaborate on
[Global Voices Online](https://globalvoicesonline.org/), the project is to
promote critical and active citizenship, that challenges some of the arcane
and undemocratic practices mentioned above.

Eleitor 2010 runs on the open source software
[Ushahidi](http://ushahidi.com/), a web-based platform which received much
attention for its utility in mapping incidents after the Haiti earthquake,
driven by SMS reports from the ground.

Ushahidi has yet to reach its full potential as an election monitoring
platform, say Góes and Casaes. With an estimated 25% of the country online
every day, and one of the highest mobile subscriber rates in Latin America,
[they hope Brazil could be the place where it comes of age this
year](http://knightcenter.utexas.edu/blog/?q=en%2Fnode%2F8295). Four weeks
away from the election, Eleitor 2010 already has 230+ reports, from every
state in the country, and from the most remote areas.

However, it is an uphill battle to get the message out about the platform, in
a country where broadcast and print media are still strong, held in the hands
of a privileged elite bent on defending its interests.

Despite this, the communications team at Eleitor 2010 has generated some media
attention, and networking with other online transparency initiatives has been
crucial. Google recently featured Eleitor 2010 on [its page dedicated to the
Brazilian elections](http://www.google.com.br/eleicoes2010/ong.html).

Góes and Casaes hope that with their awareness campaign – on social networks
including Orkut with over 40 million users, partnerships with networks of
internet cafés, NGOs, and social movements – Eleitor 2010 will break through
and change the way thousands of voters engage in the electoral process.

Through the plaftorm, some entertaining anecdotes have already come to light,
well in advance of the October 3 vote.

Voters caught one man in a small town in the interior [selling off Twitter
accounts with 40,000+ followers](http://eleitor2010.com/reports/view/197) for
the sickeningly low price of US$125. This is illegal under Brazilian electoral
law. When confronted, the man in question gave more incriminating evidence and
then threatened to sue Eleitor 2010. The evidence, including screenshots and
transcript of a chat with him, were delivered to the Electoral Courts.

[Another comic report from São
Paulo](http://eleitor2010.com/reports/view/137), where teachers at a school
illegally encouraged children to chant for two candidates, one for mayor and
one for President, and it backfired with children instinctively chanting
“Lula!” “Lula!” The video circulated widely, and has had over 70,000 views.

[Another video that raised eyebrows](http://eleitor2010.com/reports/view/91)
was one by blogger Ricardo Gama of a VW bus owned by the City Hall being used
for a campaign in Rio de Janeiro. The blogger shouts “Are you carrying
electoral propaganda in the car of the City Hall? This is an electoral crime!
I filmed it. I am going to denounce you.”

From the north of Brazil, in the state of Maranhão, word reached Eleitor 2010
that a [network of evangelical churches was offering to “trade” 3,000
votes](http://eleitor2010.com/reports/view/216) for “support” after the
election. In the state of São Paulo, [one Bishop implored the faithful not
to](http://eleitor2010.com/reports/view/96) support President Lula’s chosen
successor, Dilma Roussef.

These examples indicate how this platform and online, participatory tools will
be of use in years to come. No matter whether it goes “viral” and becomes a
household name, [Eleitor 2010](http://eleitor2010.com/) and other transparency
initiatives have already become game-changers this election year.

