A community of enthusiastic young people in Beirut, [The Migrant Workers Task
Force](http://mwtaskforce.wordpress.com), are working to support foreign
domestic workers in Lebanon whose living and working conditions are often
desperately unfair.

The volunteer group has only been active since January 2011, but already they
have managed to attract the attention of both
[local](http://www.dailystar.com.lb/News/Local-News/2011/May-14/Volunteers-
teach-languages-to-migrant-
workers.ashx?searchText=migrant%20worker#axzz1MPGdpsud) and [international
media](http://www.irinnews.org/printreport.aspx?reportid=92699) for their
innovative approach to changing the perceptions of both workers and employers.
Among their main achievements are the [free language
courses](http://mwtaskforce.wordpress.com/sunday-classes/) they offer to
workers learning Arabic, English, or French every Sunday.

In Lebanon, approximately one domestic worker a week dies under murky
circumstances (often described as “suicide”). Eighty percent of domestic
migrant workers are not allowed to leave their employer's house at all. Their
plight and rights are almost universally ignored.

[![Migrant Workers Task Force logo](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2011/09/MWTF-
logo-375x222.jpg)](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2011/09/13/lebanon-
empowering-migrant-workers-with-language/mwtf-logo/)Initially the task force
consisted of only Alex, Lioba, Farah, Ali, and Janie and a few other members,
but recently the group has been expanding. According to Janie Shen, 24, one of
the co-founders (the only foreigner one who is actually still in Lebanon) the
idea for the Migrant Workers Task Force was born after newcomers to Lebanon,
like herself and Alex, were shocked by the conditions of migrant workers in
the country – for instance, the degrading uniforms, general mistreatment,
having passports confiscated, food rationed, and only one day a week off or
none at all.

In this video Janie explains more about what the Migrant Workers Task force is
about:

Migrant Workers Task Force have no office or official organization, but have
been meeting regularly at Zico House in Hamra and will soon relocate some of
their activities to [Migrant House](http://mwtaskforce.wordpress.com/) in
Nabaa. Everyone involved in the project is a volunteer, and they rely on small
fundraising events to cover their costs.

[![Anti-racism ad by Migrant Workers Task
Force](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-content/uploads/2011/09/anti-racism-
ad-Alaa-212x300.jpg)](http://mwtaskforce.wordpress.com/2011/04/26/antiracism-
poster-campaign-for-labour-day-2011/)

'You see a poor man, but he is a source of wealth' Anti-racism ad by Migrant
Workers Task Force

Part of the success of the group is due to their talented use of social media
for communication. All news and announcements are published on their
[blog](http://mwtaskforce.wordpress.com/), and they manage a
[group](http://www.facebook.com/#!/groups/19504133537/) and several [pages
](http://www.facebook.com/event.php?eid=241408995882718)on Facebook. They also
share images and videos on [Flickr](http://www.flickr.com/photos/mwtaskforce/)
and a [Youtube](http://www.youtube.com/user/mwtaskforce).

Among their memorable campaigns are, their [anti-racism posters for
International Worker's
Day](http://mwtaskforce.wordpress.com/2011/04/26/antiracism-poster-campaign-
for-labour-day-2011/) (featuring three language class students), a series of
interviews with migrants about their conditions, and some [short satirical
films](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2011/06/29/lebanon-welcome-to-lebanon-
as-seen-by-a-migrant-worker/) in response to an official campaign showing
Lebanon as a paradise for tourists.

They have also hosted local migrant celebrations, like a [Nepalese New
Year](http://mwtaskforce.wordpress.com/2011/04/19/momos-tarab-bollywood-a-
nepalese-new-year-at-t-marbouta/) celebration, and have helped sell [African
and Asian food and other migrant
products](http://mwtaskforce.wordpress.com/2011/04/30/happy-day-at-souk-el-
tayeb/).

**Language classes**

On Sundays workers from Nepal, Philippines, Ethiopia, Madagascar, Sudan
assemble to learn languages with volunteer teachers who wish to help. They
began as informal gatherings, but are now developing into more structured
language lessons.

Here is a video from the languages lessons one Sunday and some testimonies of
students and teachers. One teacher says, “I am offering my skills in English
to let them speak for their rights.”

The language classes have become an important venue for community building.
One student interviewed in the video below is [Rahel
Zegeye](http://africanwomenincinema.blogspot.com/2011/09/rahel-zegeye-
experiences-of-ethiopian.html), a migrant worker from Ethiopia, who over two
years put all of her earnings towards making a feature film about the
experience of domestic workers in Lebanon.

In less than a year, Migrant Workers Task Force has mobilized more volunteers
and goodwill than many other more established organizations. Via language and
communication, they have helped migrant domestic workers in Lebanon facing a
very local problem gain highly deserved international attention.

