[![Screen grab from the Juarez Heroreports
map](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-content/uploads/2011/09/Screen-
shot-2011-09-03-at-15.53.25-375x216.png)](http://juarez.cronicasdeheroes.mx/reports/map)

Screen grab from the Juarez Heroreports map

[Heroreports](http://heroreports.org/ "http://heroreports.org/") is a non-
profit project dedicated to crowdsourcing and mapping reports of citizen
courage and positive social behavior. It started in [Ciudad Juárez,
México](http://juarez.cronicasdeheroes.mx/
"http://juarez.cronicasdeheroes.mx/") as an initiative of the [MIT Center for
Civic Media](http://civic.mit.edu/ "http://civic.mit.edu/") called “ _Crónicas
de Héroes_ “, under the direction of [Yesica
Guerra](http://civic.mit.edu/users/yesica
"http://civic.mit.edu/users/yesica"), a researcher in urban design with a
master's degree in Architecture and Urbanism from MIT. Ciudad Juarez is known
for being one of the [most violent cities in the
world](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2011/03/08/mexico-remembering-the-women-
of-ciudad-juarez/), due to drug cartel violence and [female
homicides](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Female_homicides_in_Ciudad_Ju%C3%A1rez).

Yesica Guerra describes the project in this video interview with the [Knight
Foundation](http://www.knightfoundation.org/blogs/knightblog/2011/7/15/online-
stories-courage-draw-juarez-residents-outdoors/
"http://www.knightfoundation.org/blogs/knightblog/2011/7/15/online-stories-
courage-draw-juarez-residents-outdoors/") blog [en]:

The following video is a trailer in Spanish for the Juárez Heroreports [es]:

According to[ Maite Fernandez ](http://ijnet.org/blog/director-crowdsourced-
website-mexico-go-offline-build-participation "http://ijnet.org/blog/director-
crowdsourced-website-mexico-go-offline-build-participation")from the
[International Journalists’ Network](http://ijnet.org/ "http://ijnet.org/"),
the idea for the project came about in 2009 when [Christopher
Csikszentmihályi](http://www.media.mit.edu/people/csik), director of the
[Center for Future Civic Media](http://civic.mit.edu/) visited Ciudad Juarez
as part of a delegation that would suggest ideas for improving life in the
city.

The initial success of the Juárez Heroreports, which has documented and geo-
located some 1045 accounts of positive civic actions, has been followed by
other sites in [Monterrey, México, ](http://mty.cronicasdeheroes.mx/
"http://mty.cronicasdeheroes.mx/")the border between[ Tijuana, México, and San
Diego, California, USA](http://tj-sd.cronicasdeheroes.mx/ "http://tj-
sd.cronicasdeheroes.mx/"), and even [Kazakhstan](http://www.heroreports.kz/).
While they are all part of the same networks, each site has its own individual
design and personality. Nevertheless, the focus and goal remain the same.

Heroreports[ is described](http://civic.mit.edu/projects/c4fcm/hero-reports-
crónicas-de-héroes "http://civic.mit.edu/projects/c4fcm/hero-reports-crónicas-
de-héroes") as a campaign of positive thinking. Here is an example of one
short witness report submitted [on April 9,
2011](http://juarez.cronicasdeheroes.mx/reports/view/1148), in Ciudad Juárez:

> Un día que regresaba del Paso Tx. Iba una señora caminado mayor de edad que
> regresaba de trabajar y traía muchas bolsas pesadas vi como un joven le
> ofreció ayuda hasta que la subió al camión.

One day I was returning from El Paso, Texas I saw an elderly lady walking home
from work who had a lot of heavy bags. I saw a young man offer her help and
even assisted her on to his truck.

Projects like Heroreports show an innovative way of employing digital media in
local communities. The benefits are manifold, bridging the realms of online
activity and “the street”. The potential uses and results cannot be fully
predicted. Already, some submissions read more like literary short stories
than mere reports.

The Heroreports websites are empowering individuals to speak up and focus on
positive citizen behavior in densely-populated areas that suffer from
conflict, and are becoming useful sources of comparative socio-geopolitical
documentation.

