Throughout our mapping and
[analysis](https://globalvoicesonline.org/-/special/transparency-technology-
network/) of the 36 case studies on the [Technology for Transparency Network
](https://transparency.globalvoicesonline.org/) we have tended to group
projects by their geographic region. This is in large part because [our team
of researchers and research
reviewers](https://transparency.globalvoicesonline.org/team) were hired
explicitly to map and evaluate technology projects that promote transparency
and accountability in the regions were they are based. However, when one steps
back to take in all of the projects from a global perspective, it becomes
readily apparent that there are thematic and strategic categories which apply
across regions. This week's posts aim to tease out some of those trends and
offer constructive criticism and concrete recommendations to funders, project
leads, and researchers as to how such projects can become more effective,
efficient, and sustainable.

On the [Technology for Transparency Network
platform](https://transparency.globalvoicesonline.org/) we have organized
[case studies](https://transparency.globalvoicesonline.org/projects/all) and
[project listings](https://transparency.globalvoicesonline.org/listings/all)
into ten different categories: budget monitoring, civic complaints, election
monitoring, parliament informatics, extractive industries, private sector
transparency, advocacy, crime, local government, and aid transparency. You can
sort through each of the ten categories by clicking on the filters beneath our
[map interface](https://transparency.globalvoicesonline.org/). If you have
suggestions for other categories that we should be tracking, please leave a
comment below.

Today's post will focus on two of the largest categories we reviewed – budget
and election monitoring.

### Budget Monitoring

Monitoring the budgets of local and national governments is a key instrument
in the toolkit of any accountability activist. Active budget monitoring can
both prevent and expose corruption. As an example, despite protests from
privacy activists, the Mexican government decided to [publish the salaries of
elected
officials](http://www.elsemanario.com.mx/news/news_display.php?story_id=5148).
(At the time, Mexican governors were among the highest paid in the world.) The
reasoning is that any elected official who is clearly spending more than
his/her salary permits should be scrutinized closely to determine where that
money is coming from, and whether it is linked to political misbehavior.

Budget monitoring can also lead to improved public services and
infrastructure. For example, in the United States the government recently
passed the largest economic stimulus program in the country's history. To
track how that money was spent the government created
[Recovery.gov](http://www.recovery.gov/) while ProPublica created [Eye on the
Stimulus](http://www.propublica.org/ion/stimulus), which also tracks how the
money is spent. Kenya had its own stimulus program, called the Constituency
Development Fund, which started in 2003 as a way to fund local governments to
improve their infrastructure and services. [Budget Tracking
Tool](https://transparency.globalvoicesonline.org/project/budget-tracking-
tool) is a way to see how that money is being spent and to leave comments to
report on the progress of those projects. However, so far few people seem to
use the tool, and even fewer comment on the progress of the development
projects in their constituency.

In order to effectively monitor and evaluate any budget, the data must be
available in a format which allows for analysis in a spreadsheet or database
program. The information should be both granular, in order to evaluate as many
variables as possible, and timely, in order to expose corruption and
inefficiencies before it is too late. Unfortunately, most governments that do
publicly release their budget information do so using Adobe's PDF format,
which doesn't allow for data analysis. As Noam Hoffstater and Alon Padan of
Our Budget pointed out in our
[interview](https://transparency.globalvoicesonline.org/project/our-budget),
the accounting offices of governments obviously have their budget information
in spreadsheet format, but they purposely publish it as a PDF document in
order to discourage closer scrutiny.

[Our Budget](http://ourbudget.org.il/) uses OCR technology to create an Excel
spreadsheet version of the Tel Aviv municipal budget. Volunteers go over and
check every entry, and then they make visualizations and graphs of how the
municipality is spending taxpayers’ money. Importantly, while they have done
this for two years running, in the end they decided that litigation (demanding
that the municipality release the budget in spreadsheet format) was a better
strategy than time-consuming, technological solutions.

[Dinero y
Politica](https://transparency.globalvoicesonline.org/project/dinero-y-
pol%C3%ADtica-money-politics) uses a similar strategy to create more
information about campaign financing in Argentinian elections so that voters
can make fully informed choices. In Argentina, political parties must disclose
all of the campaign contributions they received at least ten days before the
election. But, once again, they only have to disclose those numbers in a PDF
report, which, doesn't allow citizens analyze the data to see relationships
between political interests and politicians. So the Dinery y Politica team has
created an interactive database which [maps donations and creates
visualizations](http://www.dineroypolitica.org/) of which parties receive
donations from which groups, unions, and companies.

**Recommendations:**

Both Our Budget and Dinero y Política use [Many
Eyes](https://transparency.globalvoicesonline.org/tools/many-eyes) to
visualize the data they collect. We recommend that other budget monitoring
activists learn how to use Many Eyes and [Many Eyes
Wikified](https://transparency.globalvoicesonline.org/tools/many-eyes-
wikified) in order to dynamically visualize budget information. [Google's
Fusion Tables](http://tables.googlelabs.com) is another powerful online tool
to both store and visualize complex information related to public budgets.

The information collected and analyzed from all three projects does not seem
to be exploited well by civil society organizations, journalists, or bloggers
in the countries where they are based. We recommend to project leaders that
they do more outreach to train journalists, activists, and bloggers how to use
the tools they have developed. A sample gallery of effective ways their
information has been used could help inspire others to build on that work.

A number of traditional civil society organizations have been working in the
realm of budget monitoring and open budgets for quite some time. The
[International Budget Partnership](http://www.internationalbudget.org) has a
very useful [world map](http://www.internationalbudget.org/worldmap/) which
links to country profiles with related information and organizations working
on budget monitoring. We recommend to donors that they support an
international event that brings together technologists and budget monitoring
activists to share best practices and strategies regarding the use of modern
technology and information management systems to improve the efficiency of
budget monitoring. This event should be followed by a three-day intense “[book
sprint](http://www.booksprint.info/)” which leads to a open licensed, freely
accessible book that explains the technical steps in order to: 1) extract
financial information from PDF documents using OCR technology, 2) store budget
information in structured, public databases, 3) verify and cross-reference
information, 4) analyze and evaluate data using Many Eyes and Google Fusion
Tables, and 5) use resulting findings and conclusions to partner with media,
bloggers, civil society and government to seek greater accountability.

Following the publication of such a book – and its translation into relevant
languages – we recommend that donors support [barcamp-
style](http://www.pbs.org/idealab/2008/02/barcamps-without-borders-the-
unconference-spreads-globally005.html) events at the national level that bring
together technologists, civil society organizations, government officials,
investigative journalists, and bloggers to focus specifically on budget
monitoring.

Finally, we recommend that budget monitoring platforms partner with
accounting, statistics, and computer science professors at local universities
so that the students of their classes can help improve the governance of their
country while learning new skills and techniques.

### Election Monitoring

Like budget monitoring, election observation is an activity of government
accountability and transparency with a long history. According to
[Wikipedia](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Election_monitoring), it dates back
to at least to the 1866 plebiscite of Moldavia and Wallachia, which led to
modern Romania. In more recent times, election monitoring has tended to focus
on countries with weak democracies or democracies in transition, and has been
organized by international organizations such as the Organization for Security
and Co-operation in Europe, the European Union, the Commonwealth Secretariat,
the Council of Europe and the African Union. Major international NGOs like the
Carter Center, the International Foundation for Election Systems (IFES), the
National Endowment for Democracy (NED), the Electoral Institute of Southern
Africa, the National Democratic Institute, and the European Network for
Election Monitoring have also become increasingly active, and often partner
with local NGO's to take advantage of established national networks.

As if all of those many players weren't enough, a new generation of election
monitoring websites now ask ordinary citizens to also become election
observers by using their cell phones to report any voting irregularities they
may encounter. If all goes to plan, such reports are then verified,
categorized, and placed on a publicly accessible map.

One such project that we did not document because we felt that it has been
discussed sufficiently in both mainstream and citizen media is [Vote Report
India](http://votereport.in/). In fact, co-founder Gaurav Mishra has joked
that perhaps there were more articles about the project than reports submitted
to the platform. Mishra has also written an excellent and candid
[evaluation](http://www.digiactive.org/2009/05/15/case-study-the-report-card-
on-vote-report-india-version-10/) of the project, which lists successes,
failures, and – most importantly – lessons learned for the next incarnation of
the platform for the 2014 Indian elections.

Last month saw the first multiparty election to take place in Sudan in over 20
years. [Sudan Vote
Monitor](https://transparency.globalvoicesonline.org/project/sudan-vote-
monitor) is one of many [Ushahidi-based websites we
reviewed](https://transparency.globalvoicesonline.org/tools/ushahidi) that
allow voters to report irregularities by submitting text messages which are
then verified by a partner NGO and placed on a map. To understand the context
behind Sudan Vote Monitor and the difficulty in implementing a technology
project in Sudan, I highly recommend Rebekah Heacock's post, “[Sudan: Is ICT
all it's cracked up to be?](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2010/03/04/sudan-
is-ict-all-its-cracked-up-to-be/)” Most of the attention given to the
initiative during the election itself focused on the fact that the site was
[temporarily blocked](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2010/04/26/sudan-sudan-
vote-monitor-website-was-blocked-for-six-days/) by the government. Less
reported was the website's impact on ensuring credible elections. According to
the website itself, [257 reports](http://sudanvotemonitor.com/reports) of
voting irregularities were received. In a [followup
interview](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2010/04/29/sudan-checking-in-with-
sudan-vote-monitor/) with Heacock, project coordinator Fareed Zein says that
number is probably somewhere between 300 – 500 if you count all SMS reports,
which have yet to be added to the system. But few, if any, of these reports
have been verified, and there has been no official response to any of the
reports. Still, Zein
[suggests](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2010/04/29/sudan-checking-in-with-
sudan-vote-monitor/) that the objective of this first implementation was
simply to create more information, rather than necessarily holding anyone
accountable:

> In previous elections it was all a closed door affair — nobody knew exactly
> what went on on the ground. The intention of this was to be able to get the
> information out to the public, internally and externally, about what's going
> on. Just being able to get the word out was enough for us. We didn't set out
> to try to urge anybody to take any specific action. Our mission was to get
> the information out and then let people judge and act for themselves.

Zein says it is likely that Sudan Vote Monitor will be used again during the
January 2011 [Southern Sudanese independence
referendum](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Southern_Sudanese_independence_referendum,_2011).

Like Vote Report India and Sudan Vote Monitor, [Cuidemos el
Voto](https://transparency.globalvoicesonline.org/project/cuidemos-el-voto) is
another national election monitoring platform that uses
[Ushahidi](https://transparency.globalvoicesonline.org/tools/ushahidi). Co-
founder Oscar Salazar
[notes](https://transparency.globalvoicesonline.org/project/cuidemos-el-voto)
that, while Mexico transitioned to multiparty democracy in 2000 with the
election of Vicente Fox, vote buying and [conditional cash
transfer](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Conditional_Cash_Transfer) programs are
still corrupting the democratic process. Cuidemos el Voto managed to achieve
something important that other, similar projects lacked: support and
endorsement from an official government body, in this case, Mexico's Special
Prosecutor's Office. Still, that endorsement did not apparently lead to any
sort of accountability. For example, on July 5, 2009 someone [reported that in
Puebla they were offering 500 pesos to vote for the PAN
party](http://www.cuidemoselvoto.org/reports/view/219). But this report wasn't
verified and we don't see any kind of followup. For such election monitoring
projects to make an impact in terms of accountability, they need the staff and
resources to verify all reports and ensure that the proper government body
responds. Or, perhaps more appropriately, they must partner with other
organizations who can invest in the long haul of followup work. It could even
be the perfect semester-length project for a political science graduate-level
class.

The [African Elections
Project](https://transparency.globalvoicesonline.org/project/african-
elections-project) differs slightly from other election monitoring projects we
reviewed in that 1) it doesn't use Ushahidi and 2) it focuses on multiple
countries throughout Sub-Saharan Africa. The project, funded by the [Open
Society Initiative for West Africa](http://www.osiwa.org/), uses new media
tools to produce and disseminate more information about elections in ten
African countries including Malawi, Namibia, Botswana, Niger, Guinea,
Mozambique, Mauritania and Togo. Their hope is that more watchful eyes
reporting on the electoral process will help prevent and expose vote fraud,
and encourage clean elections. However, most of the countries where they work
have broadband penetration levels between five and ten percent. Until there is
greater connectivity, the impact of an online project like [African Elections
Project](http://www.africanelections.org/) is inherently circumscribed,
despite its relatively large budget.

[VoteReport
PH](https://transparency.globalvoicesonline.org/project/votereportph) is the
last Ushahidi-based election monitoring initiative we reviewed. Most of these
projects were only attract the participation of very few users because there
was not broad awareness that the websites exist at all. [VoteReport
PH](http://votereportph.org/) is different in that its team spent six months
prior to the election going around the country and giving voter education
classes about how to use automated voting machines (which were used for the
first time), and simultaneously, how to submit reports to VoteReporter PH by
sending text messages. Such on-the-ground outreach work is necessary in order
to create more awareness about citizen election monitoring platforms. In all,
[654 reports of voting
irregularities](http://ushahidi.votereportph.org/reports/) were submitted. For
example, at 1 p.m. on May 10 “massive vote buying” was
[reported](http://ushahidi.votereportph.org/reports/view/133) by an anonymous
contributor via text message. We are told that the report was verified, but
there is no further detail on what constitutes verification, or if anything
was done to follow up on the report. One very useful strategy by the
VoteReportPH team was to write a [separate blog post highlighting the most
urgent reports of vote fraud](http://votereportph.org/blog/votereportphs-best-
sms-reports-3-may-54110pm-10-may-070614am). They also published a [helpful
blog post](http://votereportph.org/blog/vote-report-ph-gist-so-far-
mapping-2010-philippine-elections) summarizing some of their early experiences
and conclusions. I recommend Mong Palatino's overview, “[Monitoring Philippine
Elections through Social
Media](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2010/05/11/monitoring-philippine-
elections-through-social-media/)“, to get a better idea of how Twitter and
blogging played a distributed role in monitoring the Philippine elections.

Though Ushahidi was created to [map reports of
violence](http://legacy.ushahidi.com/) that occurred _after_ Kenya's 2007
election, it was quickly adapted to monitor elections themselves. In addition
to the above-mentioned case studies, Ushahidi was also used to map voting
irregularities in [Afghanistan](http://aliveinafghanistan.org/) and
[Lebanon](http://www.sharek961.org/).

Ushahidi implementations have already been set up for [Colombia's presidential
election](http://denuncia.nuestraselecciones.org/) later this month, the
[Puebla municipal elections in July](http://puebla.cuidemoselvoto.org/), and
[Brazil's general election in October](http://eleitor2010.com/).

**Recommendations:**

We recommend to project implementers that they plan at least one year ahead of
the elections they will monitor. In addition to the technical challenges of
implementing and localizing the Ushahidi platform, they must also concentrate
on outreach efforts to 1) establish an SMS shortcode, 2) hold on-the-ground
training workshops, 3) partner with relevant civil society organizations, and
4) partner with media organizations to spread awareness. Such projects should
also seek funding to cover the expenses of marketing the project via
billboards, radio commercials, posters, and leaflets. Finally, and perhaps
most importantly, election monitoring platforms should establish strong
relationships with the governing electoral commission in order to agree upon a
protocol for verifying and acting on reports of vote fraud. Without a signed
agreement in place, the project is unlikely to make a concrete impact toward
greater accountability and credibility of elections.

We recommend that online election monitoring projects partner with students at
universities to verify and follow up on all submitted reports, similar to how
[Tufts University students worked to verify
reports](http://enews.tufts.edu/stories/1621/2010/02/05/crisismapping)
submitted to the [Ushahidi implementation for the Haiti
earthquake](http://haiti.ushahidi.com/).

We recommend to funders that they fund specific election-related plugins that
make Ushahidi a more functional platform for election monitoring. Oscar
Salazar of Cuidemos el Voto has
[noted](https://transparency.globalvoicesonline.org/project/cuidemos-el-voto)
that Ushahidi lacks certain features for election monitoring:

> Ushahidi's main design was to provide a common pool of reports. So if I
> started giving administrative access to everyone, everyone will see the same
> pools . What happen's if two NGOs that are associated with two different
> political parties get access to the same pool and start approving or
> disapproving the reports? I don't want everyone to have access to the same
> pool. i want to give special accounts to different NGOs, where they see only
> their own reports plus the citizen reports. Ushahidi wasnt designed for a
> lot of NGOs working together. So we are tweaking it for these local
> elections to make it work in this way.

The tweaks by the Cuidemos el Voto team should be packaged into a plugin that
can be shared with other election monitoring initiatives.

We recommend to the Ushahidi team and to their funders, that increased
emphasis be placed on documentation, especially in regard to best practices
regarding election monitoring. Patrick Meier has written an [introductory
primer](http://blog.ushahidi.com/index.php/2010/04/23/primer-election-
monitoring/) and Erik Hersman has made a [forum
posting](http://forums.ushahidi.com/topic/common-election-monitoring-
categories) to compare common election-related categories, but there is still
a lack of needed documentation for any activist wanting to use Ushahidi to
monitor elections. We suggest that Ushahidi aspire to a documentation resource
as thorough and easily accessible as WordPress’
[Codex](http://codex.wordpress.org/).

We recommend that researchers do both more longitudinal and comparative
research in order to better understand the impact and methodology of online,
citizen election monitoring websites. How does verification compare across
projects? What strategies bring about accountability? How do you increase the
signal to noise ratio for submitted reports? How do you best visualize reports
to inspire action? What are obstacles to collaboration with traditional
election monitoring organizations? What are the pros and cons of anonymity in
citizen election reporting? These are just a few open-ended questions that
require more research.

Finally, we recommend that multilateral and civil society organizations
focused on election monitoring organize an international event to bring
together the coordinators and technologists behind the various online election
monitoring websites we have listed above to share experiences and prepare
improved documentation for future implementations. This has [already happened
at the regional level in East Africa](http://www.ndi.org/node/16080), which
led to [calls for a “Tech Election Monitoring
Toolbox”](http://blog.ushahidi.com/index.php/2010/03/05/the-need-for-a-tech-
election-monitoring-toolbox/), but it should also happen at the international
level to share skills, techniques, resources, and future plans across distinct
tech communities.

In the next post we will summarize and offer our recommendations related to
more categories of case studies from the Technology for Transparency Network.

