[![](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-content/uploads/2010/08/450px-
World_Map_Index_of_perception_of_corruption_2009.png)](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2010/08/450px-
World_Map_Index_of_perception_of_corruption_2009.png)

Overview of the index of perception of corruption, 2009. (The highest
perception of corruption is colored red, and lowest is colored green.) Source:
Wikipedia

According to [Transparency International](http://www.transparency.org)‘s
[Corruption Perceptions
Index](http://www.transparency.org/policy_research/surveys_indices/cpi/2009),
the vast majority of countries in the Middle East and North Africa region
score very poorly to various degrees. The often oppressive and hostile
policies towards activists and organizations that are involved with civil
society and governance (including those that promote transparency and
accountability) and the mediocre integration of technology in governance,
administration, and everyday life in general have resulted in a negligible use
of available technologies and the tools and platforms they provide to promote
accountability and institutional integrity.

### Major Challenges

Legislative hurdles often stand in the face of NGOs and activists working to
promote transparency. For instance, while the constitutions of Syria and Egypt
grant the freedom of expression and the establishment of civil society
organizations that focus on social or political issues, an Emergency Law in
place since the sixties suspends those rights under the pretense of national
security and gives unlimited power to the security apparatus to persecute
individuals and organizations deemed unfavorable by the authorities. Iran,
Saudi Arabia, Syria, Tunisia, and Egypt comprised half of the Committee to
Protect Journalists’ 2009 list of the [10 Worst Countries to be a
Blogger](http://www.cpj.org/reports/2009/04/10-worst-countries-to-be-a-
blogger.php), which is one indicator of the respective countries’ hostility
towards online activism and the use of technology to raise issues of
corruption and accountability.

Apart from the legislative hurdles, many countries in the region suffer from
low Internet penetration or weak infrastructure and slow connection speeds.
According to [Internet World
Stats](http://www.internetworldstats.com/stats5.htm), Internet penetration in
the Middle East and North Africa is 29.8 percent — a little above the world
average of 25.6 percent. Penetration in the countries ranges from 1.1 in Iraq
and 1.8 in Yemen to 75.9 percent in the UAE and 88 percent in Bahrain. Weak
infrastructure does not help the adoption of tech tools in promoting
transparency: the vast majority of Syrian users are still using dial-up
connections, and the Lebanese Internet was recently ranked as having the
second worst upload speed globally.

Currently, many of the local chapters of Transparency International and other
organizations and activists that share the same focus and goals work under the
constant risk of scrutiny and persecution of the local authorities. Some of
them operate unlicensed in countries that do not allow such organizations or
make it extremely difficult to acquire licensing. The most prevalent form of
technology adoption is still the most basic — creating a website that holds
introductory information about the organization and some resources and
articles covering transparency news from around the world.

### Success Stories

Despite the aforementioned hurdles, concerned activists and organizations have
made some impressive steps utilizing different technological platforms. In
2007, Morocco was buzzing with news about an anonymous activist that went by
the name [Targu﻿﻿ist Sniper](http://www.youtube.com/user/TarSniper); he
recorded several videos of identifiable police officers accepting money bribes
from drivers of passing trucks and potential smugglers and then uploaded the
videos to YouTube, where they were a major hit and received over a million
views. Threatening comments were left on his YouTube profile warning him to
stop or else, and unfortunately, local police officers to responded to the
videos with mass punishment of the residents of his area hoping that would
stop him. Eventually, the videos led to the arrest of nine corrupt policemen
and the transfer of others. Targuist Sniper is no longer active, but he has
demonstrated that an individual assisted by technology can have a huge impact
in exposing corruption.

Another distinguished effort is the [Sharek961](http://www.sharek961.org/)
project in Lebanon. Sharek961 is an Ushahidi-based platform that “empowers
Lebanese citizens to promote transparency by sending in eyewitness reports on
all election-related incidents or issues” online, by email, or via SMS.
Sharek961 received dozens of reports during the 2009 elections season in
Lebanon and anonymously published those citizen reports alongside news
reports, blog posts, photos, videos and tweets in one place, on an interactive
map.

In order to create more remarkable success stories like these, it is important
to assist local organizations and activists promoting transparency and
fighting corruption in obtaining the technological means and expertise and
legal assistance according to their needs in their respective countries. There
is a lot of potential in the region, and positive outcomes can be maximized by
offering the appropriate form support where needed.

