**_This post is part of our special coverage[Global Voices 9/11
Retrospective](https://globalvoicesonline.org/specialcoverage/global-
voices-911-retrospective/)._**

[![New York 9/11 Museum, photo by PeterJBellis \(CC-
BY\)](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2011/09/4103200587_2531911d59.jpg)](http://www.flickr.com/photos/video4net/4103200587/in/photostream/)

New York 9/11 Museum, photo by PeterJBellis (CC-BY)

[New York 9/11
Museum](http://www.flickr.com/photos/video4net/4103200587/in/photostream/)

Ten years have passed since the coordinated 9/11 attacks on the USA by al-
Qaeda; that one event altered the way the West interacted with the Middle
East, changed attitudes towards Islamism, and introduced new restrictions
regarding travel and border crossings. All this is discussed by young people
from all around the world through a series of [short
videos](http://vimeo.com/album/1680725), reflecting on coming of age in the
post 9/11 era.

[Salmaa Elshanshory](http://vimeo.com/28574440) lived in Texas at the time of
the attack, and as a Muslim American she felt both the negative stereotypes
borne from ignorance as well as the support, kindness and generosity of the
community which came together to help strangers after the attacks. She prefers
to think of her generation as one where people learned to stand next to
strangers in the face of uncertainty and move on reacting in a positive
manner.

[Hisham Almiraat from Morocco](http://vimeo.com/album/1680725/video/28277268)
[Disclosure: Hisham is a collaborator for [Global Voices
Online](https://globalvoicesonline.org/author/hisham/)] felt misrepresented as
a Muslim and Arab: not only by the government, which failed to acknowledge
that there were people who did not support their attack, but also the media
and by the attackers themselves, who declared that they had done so on Arab's
behalf. Ten years afterwards, he has seen the decrease in popularity for
Arabic autocratic regimes, fanaticism and extremism, and a rise in popular
movements struggling and managing to topple these regimes to replace them with
a more egalitarian society.

[Generation 9/11: Hisham Almiraat (Morocco)](http://vimeo.com/28277268) from
[British Council USA](http://vimeo.com/britishcouncilusa) on
[Vimeo](http://vimeo.com).

[Hungarian Krisztian Gal
](http://vimeo.com/album/1680725/video/28265065)reflects that even though they
were geographically removed from the events, firefighters in his city and
schools all took action to remember those who lost their lives during the
attacks. What he realized is that being outside of the events allows people to
have a different perspective on what is going on, and that connecting to
different cultures and nations is a way to get a better grasp of world
politics and international relations he decided to include this new insight
into his work and life.

[Generation 9/11: Krisztian Gal (Hungary)](http://vimeo.com/28265065) from
[British Council USA](http://vimeo.com/britishcouncilusa) on
[Vimeo](http://vimeo.com).

[Cristina Balli in Texas](http://vimeo.com/album/1680725/video/28287108)
remembers how fear possessed her community and how borders were scapegoated as
the sources of danger. Immigrants in general became something to be feared and
it turned into an Us Vs.Them situation, even though the attackers hadn't come
in through the Mexico-US border and the communities had nothing to do with the
attack. The previously fluid border where cultural exchanges had taken place
for generations became a wall, and she says it completely affected the dynamic
and changed the way of life in her town.

[Generation 9/11: Cristina Balli (USA)](http://vimeo.com/28287108) from
[British Council USA](http://vimeo.com/britishcouncilusa) on
[Vimeo](http://vimeo.com).

More videos are available on the [Generation 9/11 video
project](http://vimeo.com/album/1680725) website. The project is a joint
endeavor of the [British Council's Our Shared
Future](http://www.oursharedfuture.org/) and [Transatlantic Network
2020](http://www.tn2020.org/).

**_This post is part of our special coverage[Global Voices 9/11
Retrospective](https://globalvoicesonline.org/specialcoverage/global-
voices-911-retrospective/)._**

Thumbnail image shows ‘WTC Tribute in Light’, 11 September, 2008. Image by
Flickr user [milkmit](http://www.flickr.com/photos/milkmit/2850415324/) (CC
BY-NC-ND 2.0).

