[![](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2010/07/drumbeat_logo-375x102.png)](http://www.drumbeat.org/)[The
Mozilla Foundation](http://www.mozilla.org/), creator of the internet browser
Firefox, has launched [Drumbeat](http://www.drumbeat.org/), a project that
seeks to gather people with the most diverse backgrounds and from many parts
of the world to think up projects that promote the openness of the web.
Teachers, technologists, designers, developers, lawyers, translators: everyone
who uses and loves the web is invited to help make the web a better place, and
keep it open and free.

Drumbeat is all about [keeping the web open](https://www.drumbeat.org/about),
and guarding its open nature:

> We want to spark a movement. We want to keep the web open for the next 100
> years. The first step: inviting you to do and make things that help the web.
> That's what Drumbeat is — practical projects and local events that gather
> smart, creative people around big ideas, solving problems and building the
> open web.

Among the featured projects, _[Universal
Subtitles](http://www.drumbeat.org/universal-subtitles)_ , a software project
and global community to subtitle, caption and translate every video on the
web. _[WebMadeMovies](http://www.drumbeat.org/webmademovies)_ by Brett Gaylor
(producer of [RIP: The Remix Manifesto](http://ripremix.com/)), an innovation
lab transforming the way we create and experience video on the web, and the
_[P2PU School of Webcraft](http://www.drumbeat.org/p2pu-webcraft)_ , a
powerful new way to teach and learn web developer skills.

[![](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2010/07/061220102010-768x1024-225x300.jpg)](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2010/07/061220102010-768x1024.jpg)

Mozilla Drumbeat in São Paulo, June 2010. Photo by Diego Casaes.

A handful of other interesting projects are also listed on the Drumbeat
website. _[Help me Investigate](https://www.drumbeat.org/project/help-me-
investigate)_ , a project for crowd-sourcing investigative journalism, breaks
the investigation process in small pieces so volunteers can help investigate
and verify news information. Check out the [current
projects](https://www.drumbeat.org/projects) page.

Mozilla Drumbeat was officially launched in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil in March
2010. In addition to gathering people on the web to work on these projects,
Mozilla encourages groups to meet in their local neighborhoods and cities to
discuss the open web.

Up to now, there were four Drumbeat events in Brazil; the lastest [took place
in São Paulo](http://culturadigital.br/drumbeat/2010/06/07/drumbeat-sao-paulo-
batucada-no-dia-12-de-junho/) [pt] and gathered individuals from 13 different
parts of the country: from the far south to the heart of the Amazon forest.
There were also Drumbeat events in Paris, Toronto and Bulgaria. Information on
past and upcoming events can be found on [this
page](http://www.drumbeat.org/events).

A closed internet slows down innovation and commerce, and stifles
collaboration. The open web is threatened by walled gardens, roadblocks,
gatekeepers, centralization and lack of privacy control. For this reason,
Drumbeat is reaching out for ideas and individuals to make sure the web will
be forever open and free. [Start a
project](http://www.drumbeat.org/node/add/project), or [join
one](http://www.drumbeat.org/projects) that's already rolling!

Disclosure: I'm part of the team that conducts the Mozilla Drumbeat events in
Brazil.

