[![](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2010/07/islapres-100x100.jpg)](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2010/07/islapres.jpg)

Presidential Island

Humorous political cartoons provide a steam valve for Colombians and
Venezuelans who tune into the web for different perspectives on current events
through animated online web shows.

In Colombia,[ Internautismo Crónico (Chronic Internautism)
](http://internautismo.com/index.php)and Parodiario TV provide commentary on
recent events and in Venezuela, Chigüire Bipolar has established itself with
Presidential Island. While Internautism doesn't have a specific series to
discuss political affairs but just puts the characters in different situations
as they arise, [ Parodiario.tv
](http://www.youtube.com/user/piensaenlentejas)has made a name for itself with
Little Tyrant, a webshow featuring two versions of tyranny, a Right wing and a
left wing represented by a green and a left character. Venezuela's
[Presidential Island
](http://http://www.youtube.com/user/IslaPresidencial)takes a leaf from TV
Series LOST and casts Latin American presidents and the Spanish King as
castaways all together in a deserted island. Following, a selection from the
shows.

In [this episode of
Internautismo,](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=9qqeBrD9RvI) the presidents of
Venezuela, Colombia and Ecuador all go to a popular 90's Peruvian Talk Show,
Laura in America, a Jerry-Springer like show where double crossing,
unfaithfulness and mystery babies made a daily appearance. The show is called
“I can't get along with my neighbors and they want to kill me” and Alvaro
Uribe, Colombia's president tells Laura all about his problems with Hugo
Chavez, Venezuela's President, who denies giving rocket launchers to
Colombia's enemies (while admitting he has given them many other things) while
later on Ecuador's president, Rafael Correa denies he's been sleeping around
with the Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia (FARC), even though there's a
secret video. At the end, in typical Laura in America style, guests are given
the traditional rewards in the show: a sandwich cart and computer classes.

Meanwhile Little Tyrant, [the Parodiario's
cartoon,](http://www.youtube.com/user/piensaenlentejas) entertains with its
visions of how bad leadership does not come with a specific party color. The
popularity of this cartoon (released under a Creative Commons License) has
resulted in the sale and promotion in Colombian book and music stores of the
DVD with both seasons of the show. In [this episode of Little
Tyrant](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=sOIpGwgndWU), based on [popular
Colombian children's rhyme “Rin Rin Renacuajo”
](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Rin_Rin_the_tadpole), lefty tyrant and righty
tyrant discover how to be an informant and learn important lessons along the
way, such as how getting paid in advance can make all the difference.

On Venezuela's side, the highly entertaining Presidential Island, brought to
us by [Chigüire Bipolar ](http://www.elchiguirebipolar.com/)shows us a more
complex relationship between the Latin American nations. On this two part
episode, the presidents are cast away in an abandoned island after leaving the
Presidential Summit. They build a raft and decide to leave the island: however
not all of them can fit in it as President Chavez from Venezuela suggests, so
a soccer match is played between the aligned countries and the non-aligned
countries and the winner gets to leave the island. The game is narrated by
Spain's king. Watch [Part
1](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=yjKePAMd86A&feature=related) and [Part
2](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=_Hp5KKLAAOw).

And as an extra clip, here is the [Illustrated Venezuelan
History](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=8dgw7a_8ZiM) by RetroTV of Barinas,
Venezuela:

