Regulating internet content today is viewed as an anti-democratic practice but
Southeast Asian governments seem able to justify it by invoking the need to
save the young from the scourge of indecent sexual behavior.

Indonesia’s plan to filter web of “bad” content through its [Multimedia
Content Screening team](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2010/02/17/sos-
internet-indonesia/) was shelved last February after it was opposed by the
public. Today, the proposal is being revived in the wake of a [celebrity sex
tape scandal](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2010/06/10/indonesia-who-is-
ariel-peterporn/) which continues to shock both the young and old in the
world’s most populous Muslim-majority nation. After enacting an anti-
pornography law two years ago, Indonesia now wants to enforce an [internet
blacklist](http://blogs.law.harvard.edu/herdict/2010/06/15/peterporn-sex-tape-
scandal-leads-to-talk-of-more-indonesian-internet-censorship/) in response to
the demand of conservative voices to protect the morals of the young.

A [similar](http://hayden-kho.blogspot.com/) celebrity sex scandal hounded the
Philippines [last year](http://femmepower.crunchystyle.com/2009/05/26/hayden-
kho-and-katrina-halili-video-scandal-a-look-at-voyeurism-in-the-philippines/)
which paved the way for the passage of an [anti-voyeurism
law](http://lexforiphilippines.com/2010/03/02/republic-act-
no-9995-%E2%80%93-anti-photo-and-video-voyeurism-act/). The internet was also
blamed for the instant dissemination of the sex tapes which prodded lawmakers
to craft a [cybercrime bill.](http://www.abs-cbnnews.com/nation/05/29/09/sex-
scandal-bares-need-cybercrime-law)

In Cambodia, the government is proposing to establish a [state-run exchange
point](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2010/03/02/cambodias-great-internet-
firewall/) to control all local internet service providers which is intended
to strengthen internet security against pornography, theft and other
cybercrimes. The draft regulation is not yet final but it is expected that the
government will seriously pursue this measure especially after it recently
became almost helpless in stopping the cell phone and internet uploading of an
[illegally taped video of nude
ladies](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2010/03/02/cambodias-great-internet-
firewall/) bathing in a monastery.

Southeast Asian governments do no always need sex scandals to censor the web
since they can always cite other reasons, like national security, to filter
and [monitor](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2010/06/17/vietnam-law-requiring-
surveillance-app-in-internet-cafes/) internet content. For example, Thailand
became the first country in the world to shut down [100,000
websites](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2010/06/29/thailand-first-country-to-
block-100000-websites/) for containing “dangerous” material. It punishes
bloggers, [writers](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2009/01/20/thailand-
australian-writer-jailed-for-lese-majeste/) and website administrators for
violating the [lese majeste
law](https://advocacy.globalvoicesonline.org/2010/06/18/thailand-government-
shuts-43000-more-websites-for-lese-majeste-plans-to-block-3000-more-total-up-
to-113000/). Vietnam was accused by Google and McAfee of launching [cyber
attacks](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2010/05/29/vietnam-report-on-online-
censorship/) against some websites, specifically websites that advocate
opposition to bauxite mining, a controversial issue in the country.

But politically-driven internet regulation often encounters strong opposition
from internet users and it always elicits condemnation around the world,
especially from media groups and human rights organizations. Governments can
always ignore the noisy critics but they will also lose credibility.
Governments with democratic trappings cannot afford to censor the online media
for an extended period. But regulating the web to stop pornography and other
immoral acts somehow generates only a whisper of protest. It has become the
safest ruse to block “harmful” websites. Myanmar’s [internet regulation
policy](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2010/01/18/more-websites-banned-in-
myanmar-global-voices-banned-too/) has been identified as one of the draconian
measures imposed by the ruling junta but its decision to [ban two weekly
journals](http://www.irrawaddy.org/article.php?art_id=18898) for posting
photos of female models in short pants didn’t draw the normal level of
opposition from democracy groups.

The aggressive drive to eliminate sex and sexual imageries in the online
domain may be a symptom of the rising tide of conservatism in many Southeast
Asian nations. The morality card is being played to produce desirable
attitudes, sentiments and behavior among the population even if this strategy
disrespects the diverse cultures in the region. When Indonesia passed the
anti-porn law, the Bali governor protested since the law is [contrary to the
local tradition](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2010/03/31/indonesia-anti-
porn-law/) where making historic nude statues and erotic dances are sometimes
still popular. When Cambodia [blocked
websites](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2009/01/16/cambodia-plans-to-
regulate-internet-and-blogging/) showing pornography or sexy images, it
included [reahu.net](http://reahu.net/) for containing artistic illustrations
of [ancient bare-breasted Apsara
dancers](https://advocacy.globalvoicesonline.org/2009/02/01/cambodia-internet-
censorship-targets-artists/) and a Khmer Rouge soldier.

Another problem is the vague definition of what constitutes images and actions
that are pornographic, indecent, immoral, and obscene. Filipino activists are
worried that the [cybercrime bill](http://www.newmedia.com.ph/house-
bill-6794-cybercrime-prevention-act-2009-is-soooooo-vague/) would now make it
[unlawful](http://anticybercrimeact.wordpress.com/) to publish or upload
materials that contradict the official state interpretation of what is decent,
moral, and proper.

Governments have mastered the tools and techniques of censorship in the
traditional media. They are now testing the limits of online regulation.
Indonesia’s plan to enforce an internet blacklist should be monitored because
of its impact in the region. Indonesia has more than 40 million internet users
and it is acknowledged as the [Twitter capital of
Asia](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2010/01/21/indonesia-twitter-capital-of-
asia/). If Indonesia succeeds in filtering web content, other countries in the
region are expected to follow this model.

Web censorship does not only cut access to information; it also weakens the
power of internet users to form online solidarities. To really protect the
young and innocent, the best solution is to give them, their parents, and the
community in general, the proper education and relevant information about the
potential and risks of surfing the web.

