Croatian police earlier today broke up a peaceful protest against usurpation
of public space in the center of Zagreb and arrested at least 11 civic
activists. The Twitter feed with the street name
[#Varsavska](https://twitter.com/#search?q=%23Varsavska) is the main source of
immediate info and photos.

Civic associations [Right to the City](http://pravonagrad.org/) and [Green
Action](http://zelena-akcija.hr/) have been [blocking the Varšavska [= Warsaw]
street for months](http://oneworldsee.org/node/19759) in order to prevent the
demolition of this public space — a pedestrian zone — in order to build a ramp
for [the underground garage of a private ‘lifestyle
centre’](http://dalje.com/en-croatia/horvatincic-wants-a-garage-in--
varsavska/24825) [CRO] at the very center of Zagreb. Their work has been
supported by thousands of citizens who would show up at numerous
[protests](http://www.croatiantimes.com/news/General_News/2010-05-19/11067/Protests_in_Varsavska_continue_),
and [cultural events](http://oneworldsee.org/Blockade-of-Varsavska-street-
suspended-temporarily) organized in the reclaimed public space.

This morning the Police arrested the core group of protesters to make way for
construction crews to cut down the “undesirable” trees in this pedestrian
zone. Protest participant _tmedak_
[tweeted](https://twitter.com/tmedak/status/18584785422) [CRO]:

> News from the police van: 11 persons arrested for passive resistance
> [#Varsavska](https://twitter.com/#search?q=%23Varsavska)

He also posted a [photo ](http://yfrog.com/jwe6wwj)of the police moments
before they started the “enforcement.” Other participants and witnesses used
phone calls, Twitter, Twitpic and yFrog to share immediate info and photos
from the event.

[![](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2010/07/interventa-375x281.jpg)](http://twitpic.com/25ff9y)

Croatian police deals with the protesters. Photo by Mario Mikic.

Twitter user _[topssy](https://twitter.com/topssy)_ documented the event
through photos:

  * [disposition](http://yfrog.com/1shm6hj) of [protesters](http://yfrog.com/j4h5zlj) who blocked the traffic of nearby streets
  * [forming](http://yfrog.com/0vt4hbj) of the police [cordon](http://yfrog.com/096m7zj), and [preparations](http://yfrog.com/119y6wj)
  * [surveillance](http://yfrog.com/5fkxqcj) on the spot
  * [policeman](http://yfrog.com/1gmw9j) [lecturing](http://yfrog.com/9hy7kjj) the protesters that “obstructing police action is a criminal offense”
  * and the [arresting](http://yfrog.com/5dk5puj) [procedure](http://yfrog.com/126v7sj)

[Infopunkt](http://www.youtube.com/user/Infopunktchannel) published a video
clip from the scene on YouTube

Twitter user
_krunovidic_[addressed](https://twitter.com/krunovidic/status/18589938824)
[CRO] the selective use of force in this case:

> I expect the police to do the same to the peasants when they block the roads
> next time, and use the same methods as with the crew of
> [#Varsavska](https://twitter.com/#search?q=%23Varsavska)

Macedonian blogger _Andrej_ also spread the
[news](http://aandrej.blog.mk/2010/07/15/zagreb-se-bori/) [MKD] and a link to
a [live video feed](http://bambuser.com/channel/koncerti/broadcast/890242)
[CRO] using them as an example of how citizens should fight for their rights.

