_This is the second of a three-part series that aims to add more context to
the case studies and project listings on the Technology for Transparency
Network. You can find part
one[here](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2010/03/02/the-technology-for-
transparency-review-part-i/)._

Over at the [Technology for Transparency
Network](https://transparency.globalvoicesonline.org/) we have already
documented [30 technology
projects](https://transparency.globalvoicesonline.org/projects/all) that
promote transparency, accountability, and civic engagement, but we still have
yet to clearly define each of those concepts and explain in detail why they
are valued in bringing about good governance and a healthy society.

### Why Transparency?

When we discuss
[transparency](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Transparency_\(behavior\)), we are
generally referring to published information about government processes,
budgets, and elected officials. There are also other projects, such as
[CorpWatch](http://www.corpwatch.org/), [Publish What You
Pay](http://www.publishwhatyoupay.org/), and
[Sourcemap](http://www.sourcemap.org/) that aim to publish more private sector
information that is also in the public's interest.

Sometimes this information is made available by governments themselves. For
example, in June, 2002 then-President of Mexico, Vicente Fox, signed [his
country's first freedom of information
law](http://www.gwu.edu/~nsarchiv/NSAEBB/NSAEBB68/laweng.pdf) which requires
government agencies to publish in a routine and accessible manner all
information concerning their daily functions, budgets, operations, staff,
salaries, internal reports, and the awarding of contracts and concessions. (A
[clear analysis of the law](http://www.gwu.edu/~nsarchiv/NSAEBB/NSAEBB68/) was
published by Kate Doyle the day it was passed. John Ackerman has published a
[three-year evaluation of Mexico's implementation of the
law](http://www.fundar.org.mx/secciones/publicaciones/pdf/right_to_know/SEC8%20John%20M.%20Ackerman.pdf)
in comparison to similar freedom of information initiatives around the world.)

Many times, however, governments don't want to publish information about their
activities and budgets because it invites criticism and could expose corrupt
behavior. In some of these countries citizens have begun publishing that
information for themselves. Ory Okolloh, the co-founder of
[Mzalendo](http://www.mzalendo.com/), [tells
us](https://transparency.globalvoicesonline.org/project/mzalendo) that the
project began in 2006 when Kenyan MP's demanded that the Parliament website be
shut down to prevent public access to their CV's. Concerned Kenyan citizens
then began attending Parliament sessions in order to publish their
observations and help build an [online database of legislative
information](http://www.mzalendo.com/Bills.List.php). Similarly, [Mumbai
Votes](http://mumbaivotes.com/) collects and publishes information about the
criminal records of public officials and election candidates.

Often times we find that governments do in fact publish information about
their activities and spending, but they do so in ways that are not easily
accessible or comprehensible. For example, the municipal government of Tel
Aviv publishes their budget each year as a long, detailed PDF document. All of
the information is there, but it is published in a way so that citizens cannot
easily understand, visualize, and analyze their government's spending
decisions. The team behind “[Our
Budget](https://transparency.globalvoicesonline.org/project/our-budget)“,
therefore, used a combination of optical character recognition (OCR)
technology and human verification to convert the data to spreadsheet format
and use online tools to visualize and analyze the city's spending. In
Argentina all political parties are required to publicly disclose the campaign
contributions they received at least ten days prior to voting day. However,
once again these parties publish the information in long PDF reports that
obscure the relationships between money and politics in electoral campaigns.
[Dinero y
Política](https://transparency.globalvoicesonline.org/project/dinero-y-
pol%C3%ADtica-money-politics) is an attempt to present that same information
using interactive visualizations that clearly compare and contrast campaign
contributions by district, political party, and industry. In Kenya, [Budget
Tracking Tool](https://transparency.globalvoicesonline.org/project/budget-
tracking-tool) takes the budgets of federally funded, local development
projects, which are [buried deep down in government web
pages](http://www.cdf.go.ke/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=2188&Itemid=85),
and presents them in a single database where users can leave comments about
the progress, impact, and efficiency of the projects. (So far, few have.)

### Why Civic Participation?

Does transparency lead to accountability? If citizens have more information
about the activities of their government, and more access to that information,
then will public officials be compelled to perform their jobs more
competently? Will citizens demand that their input be taken into consideration
in the shaping and enforcement of policy decisions? Recently, some scholars
and observers are casting doubt on that long-held assumption. “Transparency
mobilizes the power of shame,” [writes Jonathan
Fox](http://www.escholarship.org/uc/item/8c25c3z4), “yet the shameless may not
be vulnerable to public exposure. Truth often fails to lead to justice.” In a
[podcast interview earlier this year with Fabiano
Angelico](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2010/02/09/podcast-interview-with-
fabiano-angelico-of-transparncia-brasil/) of [Transparência
Brasil](http://www.transparencia.org.br/index.html), he echoes Fox's argument,
claiming that Brazilian politicians who have been repeatedly outed as corrupt
are still re-elected, often times _because_ of their corruption. In such cases
Angelico advocates that special, appointed judges with proven track records
should bar repeatedly corrupt politicians from running for office. This
challenges classical notions of liberal democracy: that citizens should
ultimately hold their leaders accountable by supporting or removing them from
office on election day. But Guillermo O'Donnell supports Angelico's proposal,
[noting](http://books.google.com/books?id=MD8Vx1HLOZgC&pg=PA14&lpg=PA14&dq=Schedler+answerability&source=bl&ots=-iQ0rqBPQ5&sig=n3YuRguQf_YFcS6OC26Q9owJyi0&hl=en&ei=WZbVS_bGJ46J_AbenPm4Dw&sa=X&oi=book_result&ct=result&resnum=4&ved=0CBQQ6AEwAw#v=onepage&q&f=false)
that modern democracies require both “vertical accountability”, as in
elections, and “horizontal accountability”, such as inter-governmental
regulatory agencies that are empowered to sanction politicians that don't
follow the law.

Another example of transparency failing to lead to accountability can be found
in Liberia where [President Ellen Johnson-
Sirleaf](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ellen_Johnson_Sirleaf) established a
[Truth and Reconciliation Commission (TRC)](https://www.trcofliberia.org/) in
2005, modeled after a similar post-Apartheid truth commission in South Africa.
The TRC is very much an agent of horizontal accountability, tasked with
investigating and publishing information related to more than 20 years of
civil conflict in the country, and sanctioning elected officials who were
criminally involved. In June 2009 the TRC issued its final report, which named
50 individuals – [including Johnson-
Sirleaf](http://www.time.com/time/world/article/0,8599,1908635,00.html) – who
should be barred from public office for 30 years because of their direct
involvement in the country's civil war. President Johnson-Sirleaf, however,
remains in power, ignoring the recommendations of the TRC while [implementing
her own transparency and anti-corruption
legislation](http://allafrica.com/stories/200908101384.html). Despite her
controversial past, Johnson-Sirleaf is still seen by many as a strong leader
with a strong international profile who can help Liberia return to peace and
democracy.

Most researchers and observers do agree that greater transparency will not
lead to increased accountability unless proactive civic engagement is shaped
around the information that is published. Several of the projects we've
documented aim to use social networks to bring about this engagement.
[#InterNetnecesario](https://transparency.globalvoicesonline.org/project/internetnecesario)
in Mexico, for example, used a combination of Twitter, blog posts, and media
outreach to put pressure on Mexican legislators to eliminate a three percent
tax on internet access that was passed without the the media or civil
society's consultation. It is a classic example of transparency plus civic
participation leading to accountability. Mexican Twitter user [Alejandro
Pisanty](http://twitter.com/pisanty) published information about the newly
passed law that was not formerly available. A decentralized, online protest
then took place using Twitter, blogs which acted as filters and added context,
and email petitions to Mexican senators. The Mexican Chamber of Deputies soon
realized the size and strength of the opposition to the tax and invited
representatives of the online protest into the Chamber to make their arguments
against the tax, which they had been rehearsing online over the previous few
weeks. However, #InternetNecesario has also (so far) proved to be a temporary
phenomenon that in no way builds systematic processes to continually promote
transparency or to hold leaders accountable in the future. Cuidemos El Voto
offers an example of a more sustained project that aims to prevent electoral
misconduct – and specifically the buying of voters – during federal and local
elections. By partnering with the Office of the Special Prosecutor, which was
established in 2002 to document past human rights abuses, Cuidemos El Voto
attracted official federal endorsement of the voter misconduct they
documented. It is difficult, however, to measure the impact of making more
visible the buying of votes by politicians and political parties and we have
[yet to see an
example](https://transparency.globalvoicesonline.org/project/cuidemos-el-
voto#comment-68) of a candidate or party who was barred from office for
electoral misconduct that was reported on a website like Cuidemos el Voto.

Other project leaders were skeptical that increased civic discussion will
ultimately lead toward improved governance. Vivek Gilani of [Mumbai
Votes](https://transparency.globalvoicesonline.org/project/mumbai-votes) says
that online discussions tend to be rooted in personal opinion and gossip
whereas his project aims to provide readers with crisp, clear assessment based
on facts. He does not wish to provide users with a space to participate, but
rather a resource to become better informed in order to vote for the most
qualified candidates.

### How to Bring About Accountability?

A number of websites we've reviewed function as portals where citizens can
list their complaints – in general about their community, and specifically
related to their government's administration of their community – to put
pressure on the government to be more responsive to their needs. Examples
include [Ishki](https://transparency.globalvoicesonline.org/project/ishki) in
Jordan, [Kiirti](https://transparency.globalvoicesonline.org/project/kiirti)
in India, and [Penang
Watch](https://transparency.globalvoicesonline.org/project/penang-watch) in
Malaysia. The varying goals and strategies of these projects point to a
distinction that [Andreas Schedler
makes](http://books.google.com/books?id=MD8Vx1HLOZgC&lpg=PA14&ots=-iQ0rqBPQ5&dq=Schedler%20answerability&pg=PA14#v=onepage&q&f=false)
between two different dimensions of accountability: on the one hand, the
capacity or the right to demand answers (“answerability”) and, on the other
hand, the capacity to sanction. Of course, as grassroots projects, none of the
websites we reviewed are empowered with any official capacity to sanction. But
several projects do seek answerability in a variety of ways.

[Ishki](https://transparency.globalvoicesonline.org/project/ishki) was started
by four Jordanian technologists who were tired of hearing the same complaints
muttered over and over again without any action or plan for action. They
created a website to collect citizen complaints against the public and private
sector as a way to better understand and visualize the most common complaints
in Jordanian society. Their strategy is then to work with mainstream media
organizations – newspapers and radio stations – to create stories about
recurring complaints with the hope that increased coverage in the media will
put pressure on public officials to respond. In this sense, Ishki serves as a
community filter between internet users at large and mainstream media looking
for interesting watchdog stories to report on. Users can also [submit and sign
petitions](http://ishki.com/en/petitions), though the most recent petition was
posted two months ago. So far we have no examples of public officials
responding to complaints or petitions that originated on the website.

In India, [Kiirti](https://transparency.globalvoicesonline.org/project/kiirti)
takes a slightly different approach from Ishki. Rather than relying on print
and broadcast media as an instrument to put pressure on public officials, they
send emails directly to the relevant agencies in major Indian cities to ask
them to follow up on the complaints submitted to Kiirti. Founder Selvam
Velmurugan says that a streetlight was repaired and a mud path was paved
because of complaints submitted to Kiirti. It might seem strange that
submitting a complaint to a website which is then relayed to the proper agency
is more effective than submitting the complaint directly to the agency itself
in the first place. It certainly isn't more efficient. But perhaps the public
visibility of such complaints – and the responses by officials to those
complaints – is an incentive for public officials to react. They are therefore
able to show not only the demand for their work, but also their
responsiveness.

In northwestern Malaysia, [Penang
Watch](https://transparency.globalvoicesonline.org/project/penang-watch) takes
the accountability agenda one step further with a series of steps to
communicate with – and then harass – city officials until citizen complaints
are answered. Complaints submitted to
[PenangWatch.net](http://www.penangwatch.net/) are first verified by a team of
volunteers, and then forwarded to the relevant authority and/or individual to
answer or resolve the complaint. If there is no response within a week or two
then a reminder is sent out. If the complaint is still not dealt with after
two more weeks then a profile of the complaint is featured on the website and
the negligent agency/individual is “named and shamed” on the website, and via
emails to all council departments and media organizations. Project coordinator
Ong Boon Keong says that “roughly 300 complaints are submitted through Penang
Watch per year” and that so far they have “been able to settle 50 percent of
submitted complaints.” Illegal shop houses in Penang's UNESCO World Heritage
site have been shut down because of complaints submitted to the website.

### Working With, Not Against, Government

[Penang Watch](https://transparency.globalvoicesonline.org/project/penang-
watch) coordinator Ong Boon Keong is eager to point out that the website aims
to improve the local government's performance by “providing it with both
positive and negative feedback.” Some observers, [such as Archon
Fung](http://www.nextgov.com/nextgov/ng_20090903_7217.php), worry that that
the adversarial nature of many transparency and accountability websites erodes
trust in governments and institutions, and presents the government as more
inefficient and wasteful than it really is. Others say that a constant barrage
of reporting about scandals desensitizes people to actual instances of
government corruption. There are even suggestions that in countries that are
new democracies, watchdog reporting can lead to dissatisfaction with democracy
itself and lead to riots and chaos.

> The effect of governmental transparency that is about accountability may be
> simply to make that problem worse, to further de-legitimize government,
> because what the transparency system is doing is helping people catch
> government making mistakes. That's good. You do want to catch government
> making mistakes. But you want transparency and information systems that also
> highlight when government is doing a good job.
>
> Much of the current activity around governmental transparency is like
> creating a big Amazon rating system for government that only allows one- or
> two-star ratings. But that's not necessarily the case. You could also
> construct governmental transparency systems that provide the full five-star
> range.

Indeed, we have found many websites that strive to highlight the worst actions
of corrupt officials, but few if any that reward effective performance and
clean track records. In the future it is recommended that transparency and
accountability websites strike a balance between criticizing poor government
performance and celebrating that which is worth duplicating.

### Accountability Verus Self-Governance

The thirty case studies we have collected so far illustrate both the potential
and the extreme difficulty in bringing about accountability (either
answerability or sanctions) by shaping civic engagement about public
information. But, then again, accountability isn't the only stated objective
of several of the projects we've reviewed. In addition to demanding better
performance from government, platforms like Cidade Democrática can also
facilitate better community self-governance that does not rely on public
officials or understaffed agencies. Like other complaint websites we have
reviewed, [Cidade
Democrática](https://transparency.globalvoicesonline.org/project/cidade-
democrática-0) enables Brazilian citizens to list problems related to their
municipality. Other users are then encouraged to list potential solutions to
the problems and draft strategies and action plans. So far successful
solutions have depended on government involvement, but in the future one can
envision that communal gardens, walking paths, and even recycling programs can
all be coordinated by citizens _without_ government involvement.

Similarly, we are [told by Map Kibera co-founder Mikel
Maron](http://mapkibera.org/wiki/index.php?title=Background_Reading) that a
World Bank study found that Kibera residents pay on average ten times more for
water than the average person in a wealthy Nairobi neighborhood with
municipally supplied, metered water service. [Voice of
Kibera](http://kibera.ushahidi.com/) could be used as a platform to petition
government and tribal leaders to enact measures that bring down the cost of
water. However, it could also be used as a visualization of daily water costs
as an incentive to bring new suppliers into the neighborhood which would
increase competition and lower prices. In other words, these platforms can be
used by citizens to put pressure on their governments, but they can also be
used by citizens to directly improve their communities without depending on
public officials.

