[![](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2010/07/vickie-100x100.jpg)](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2010/07/vickie.jpg)

The Vickie Remoe Show

In Sierra Leone, Vickie Remoe hosts and produces a magazine style show that
covers a variety of topics: from undiscovered musical geniuses, to a day in
the life of different tradespeople, sports and in a recent installment, Sex
and STD education among college students.

Even though, Vickie mentions, it can take up to 5 hours to upload 5 minutes of
video, the content of the [Vickie Remoe
Show](http://www.vickieremoe.com/index.html) has been made available on
[Blip.tv.](http://vickieremoe.blip.tv/) so that we can take a look into Sierra
Leone's youth culture.

In the four part installment we follow Vickie as she visits Mt. Aureol to talk
to students at the Fourah Bay College, one of the top schools in the region.
Through her conversations and a couple of contest in this [first
video](http://vickieremoe.blip.tv/file/3778013/) we can glimpse at the variety
of perceptions regarding sex. From savvy women and men who believe in safer
sex and prevention to women who might want to protect themselves but are not
doing it correctly. Worth noting is the comment from one of the interviewees
who stated that while most students are interested in protecting themselves
with condoms, if they don't have one on their person it is unlikely that they
will stop to go look for one.

After finding out that many of the students are misinformed regarding
contraceptive and protection methods, [Vickie's next
stop](http://vickieremoe.blip.tv/file/3770912/) is the Marie Stopes clinic
which provides family planning services and information through the Blue Star
Network. She's shown the different types of methods and chooses the implant,
and it is put in after an examination.

In this next part, Vickie speaks with a young man whose risky behaviours
caused him to get sick several times from sexually transmitted diseases.
Interestingly enough, it seems that getting sick once didn't make the young
man think he would be at risk again.

For the[ last video](http://blip.tv/file/3771266) in the series, Vickie visits
a doctor and asks him about sexually transmitted diseases. In conclusion:
anyone can get an STD if their sexual behavior is risky, and that condoms are
the only method which protect both from STDs and unwanted pregnancies.

