I'm thrilled to announce that the [Omidyar Network has made a $1.2 million
investment in Global Voices's
work](http://www.omidyar.com/about_us/news/2010/07/01/omidyar-network-
commits-2275m-help-catalyze-government-transparency). Omidyar is a
philanthropic foundation created by eBay founder Pierre Omidyar and his wife
Pam to improve people's lives through [“harnessing the power of
markets”](http://www.omidyar.com/about_us/evolution). Omidyar has supported
some of the organizations we most admire – the [Wikimedia
Foundation](http://wikimediafoundation.org/wiki/Home), [Creative
Commons](http://creativecommons.org/), [Ushahidi](http://ushahidi.org),
[WITNESS](http://www.witness.org/) – and we're particularly honored to be part
of a “class” that includes UK-based transparency organization
[MySociety](http://www.mysociety.org/) and Kenyan political satire troupe,
[The XYZ Show](http://www.xyzshow.com/).

[![](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2010/07/gv_omidyar-375x276.png)](http://www.omidyar.com/portfolio/global-
voices)

Omidyar is known for challenging their grantees to move towards financial
stability, a path that we'd already made a high organizational priority. With
support from Omidyar, we're planning to expand our readership online and via
email, to enter into syndication agreements (like the ones we have with La
Stampa and Reuters) with at least five new partners and to start creating
original content in French and Spanish as well as in English.

Funding from Omidyar is also helping us shore up the infrastructures necessary
to manage our complex and international team. GV editors and contributors are
on every continent but Antarctica and our management team is scattered across
the globe. While we're committed to being a virtual organization without
offices or filing cabinets, we've got a lot of practical and administrative
challenges to face to ensure we're able to continue amplifying and sharing
citizen voices from around the world. Anyone who has worked in the nonprofit
community understands that support for these unsexy sorts of activities is the
hardest sort of money to raise – we're particularly grateful that Omidyar is
making an investment in our whole organization and not just a specific
project.

We're really excited about this new development and to working closely with
our friends at Omidyar, especially [Stephen
King,](http://www.omidyar.com/team/stephen-king) Omidyar's Senior Director of
Investments. Later this year, we'll be expanding [our board of
directors](https://globalvoicesonline.org/about/board-of-directors/) by two
members, including Stephen and a third representative elected from our staff
and volunteer community. Thanks to Omidyar – and [all our wonderful
supporters](https://globalvoicesonline.org/special-thanks/) – for making this
community possible.

