Perhaps the defining sights to date of the 2010 World Cup have been the
sparkling new stadiums or the colorful costumes worn by fans of each of the 32
competing nations. Without a doubt, the defining sound of the tournament has
been the droning sound of the
[vuvuzela](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Vuvuzela), which can be heard by
spectators attending the games or by the television viewer. The notable sound
has sparked a debate whether the vuvuzela adds or takes away from the World
Cup experience.

For local South African football fans, the vuvuzela has been a natural part of
the conduct of watching a match, and wonder what is the fuss. However, for
international visitors and viewers the sound of the plastic instrument has
been a novelty.

[![](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2010/06/vuvuzela1-375x249.jpg)](http://www.flickr.com/photos/alvez/4696696249/)

Photo of Vuvuzela at Soccer City by alvez and used under a Creative Commons
license.

This[ debate dates back](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2009/06/30/south-
africa-to-vuvuzela-or-not-to-vuvuzela/) to the [2009 Confederations
Cup](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/2009_FIFA_Confederations_Cup) held in South
Africa, which may have been the first exposure to the sound for many global
football fans. Some called for the vuvuzela to be banned from the stadium by
those who said that it took away from the enjoyment of the game. FIFA
President Sepp Blatter, however, gave his full backing to allowing the use of
vuvuzelas at the 2010 World Cup. He said, “[we should not try to europeanise
an African World
Cup.](http://soccernet.espn.go.com/news/story?id=656178&sec=global&cc=5739)“

Now, just days into the tournament, it has become a topic on the internet by
[those who complain about it](http://www.antivuvuzela.org/), as well as those
who defend the instrument, and even by those who criticize those grumbling
about the vuvuzela. Even though there are some reports that FIFA [may look
into restricting the vuvuzela due to television
complaints](http://www.guardian.co.uk/football/2010/jun/13/world-cup-vuvuzela-
ban-tv-complaints), many feel that it will continue on.

Syrian twitterer Anas Qtiesh [compares the sound to that of a swarm of insects
and writes](http://twitter.com/anasqtiesh/status/16070063455), “we need to
fumigate the stadium, the bee situation is getting out of hand.” Several
Twitter accounts are appearing to encourage more complaints about the
vuvuzela: [@stopvuvuzela](http://twitter.com/stopvuvuzela),
[@vuvuneela](http://www.twitter.com/Vuvuneela), and
[@vuvunee.](http://twitter.com/VuvuNee)

There were others [quick to defend the football tradition in South
Africa](http://twitter.com/PinkMinx36/statuses/15933258826). Michelle Sibanda
(@pinkminx36) writes:

> The vuvuzela is part of our country's heritage…so NO we wont stop blowing it
> and you can complain till the cows come home!!!”

The criticism about the buzzing sound of the vuvuzela proved to be quite
humorous for some, who turned around to make light of their complaints. Daniel
Reeders (@onekind) [stated](http://twitter.com/onekind/status/16009194128):

> Western world discovers Africa, discovers it to be loud, discordant,
> overwhelming, and retires to twitter to complain #vuvuzela

Finally, Karabo Harry (@kayrabH) [puts it all into perspective by offering a
suggestion](http://twitter.com/kayrabH/statuses/15860096582):

> If the sound of the #Vuvuzela irritates you get #EarPlugs & complain about
> beeger things like #Illiteracy & #Poverty.

