**_This post is part of our special coverage[Forest Focus:
Amazon](https://globalvoicesonline.org/specialcoverage/forest-focus-
amazon/)._**

The tragic oil spill in the Gulf of Mexico has the world's attention on the
devastation that badly managed oil extraction can bring. However, in some
places around the world, people live with toxic spills such as these and
through videos people try to bring the world's attention to their plight.

**Nigeria:**

The people in Nigeria have had to deal with oil pollution in the Niger Delta
for decades already, but in addition, they've also dealt with human rights
abuses that claimed the lives of anti-oil activists. [The people sued
Shell](http://wiwavshell.org/) (who handles the oil extraction in the region)
and earlier this month Shell settled for $15.5 Million the day before the
trial. This money will be used to compensate human rights activists and to
establish a trust fund. However, lawsuits for environmental damage have yet to
be fruitful since [according to the
organization](http://wiwavshell.org/about/shells-environmental-devastation-in-
nigeria/), what “cleanup” means is turning over the soil so that the oil is no
longer visible, but it is still there, contaminating the ground and making
people sick, and nothing has been done regarding the gas flares that
constantly burn.

Here is the [video testimony](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=XkRcKuGBmSg) from
people whose livelihoods have been destroyed by the oil spills in the Niger
Delta:

**Egypt:**

The beaches of [Hurghada in the Red
Sea](http://www.almasryalyoum.com/en/news/oil-spills-hurghada-threaten-marine-
life-tourism) were awash with oil a few days ago, and tourists and hotel
owners raised complaints. These complaints generated actions and [teams
immediately went forth](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=1FD-AuycDzc) to
discover the cause of the spill, plug it and clean up the beaches as the
[Hurghada environmental protection association HEPCA
reported.](http://www.hepca.com/red-sea-environment-
news.aspx?month=6&year=2010)

**  
Singapore**

A month ago we reported on the [oil spill in
Singapore,](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2010/05/29/oil-spill-disaster-in-
singapore/) caused by the collision of two tankers resulting in barrels of
crude oil contaminating the water. Following is a [citizen
video](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=bZ_aAbypmzw) showing the oil encrusted
coastline:

**Peru**

The Marañon river in the Amazon Jungle is the only source of water for more
than 28 communities that line its shores, and after the Pluspetrol oil spill
earlier this month all of these communities are left with no clean water for
all their needs and they can't fish either, since it is contaminated with more
than 300 barrels of crude oil. In _Globalizado blog_ , [Juan Arellano wrote
](http://arellanos.blogspot.com/2010/06/comunidades-del-rio-maranon-sin-
agua.html)an extensive and comprehensive post regarding the multi-faceted
impact that a spill like this can have on the wildlife of the amazon and the
indigenous communities in their relationship with waterways and rivers. Here
is a [citizen video](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=q1qyAdHzUQs#t=2m10s)
showing the oil floating over the water.

This isn't new in Peru. In Loreto, the same company PlusPetrol has a history
of spills and their efforts in cleanup aren't that clean. As one of the
workers says in [the following
video](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=RfqjK0fWmoU#t=1m57s), that hey just have
them turn over the soil, and when the authorities come along they tell them
that “the spill has been contained”, but they can't mention that the oil is
still there right under the surface where it can still contaminate water,
plants and animals. One community member speaks of how his friends have died
from crude oil ingestion and how they used to have elders live up to 90 or 100
years of age, but nowadays people are dying younger due to the ingestion of
oil.

**Venezuela:**

In spite of photos and [videos showing black tarlike oil
](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=GzZew2hf7fk)on the shores of the Lake of
Maracaibo, the Minister of Environment denies any problem or oil spill and
calls the mess and discharge, polluting the shores since 2009, “normal” as
[_Código Venezuela_ reports.  
](http://www.codigovenezuela.com/2010/06/hitcher-sin-derrame-petrolero/)

**USA:**

Besides the Gulf of Mexico oil spill, there's also the [oil spill in Utah
](http://www.huffingtonpost.com/2010/06/18/utah-oil-spill-chevron-
pay_n_618091.html)where a Chevron pipeline leaked and dumped 33,000 gallons of
oil into the waterways. While cleanup crews are getting to work and removing
the visible oil on ponds, lakes and creeks, the community is concerned about
possible effects of the contamination. Next is a [short
video](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=88RdOdf90mI) showing a creek with oil
covered sides.

**Other Locations, Other disasters:**

It seems that only now the media is getting interested in oil spills, and back
in 2005 it took a [Taiwanese blogger Munch to engage his readers](
http://translate.google.com/translate?js=y&prev=_t&hl=en&ie=UTF-8&layout=1&eotf=1&u=http%3A%2F%2Fblog.yam.com%2Fmunch%2Farticle%2F5096879&sl=auto&tl=en)
to call media offices so that the oil spill near the island of Lanyu in Taiwan
was noticed. This next picture shows the oil covered shores that were being
cleaned.

[![](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2010/06/334257067_b3d00b3fea_o-360x300.jpg)](http://www.flickr.com/photos/munch999/)

Cleaning up Oil Spill in Taiwan by Munch

But oil is not the only threat to marine environments. [Back in 2009, a ship
carrying phosphate sunk off the coast of
Madagascar](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2009/11/09/southern-madagascar-hit-
hard-by-severe-drought-and-toxic-spill/) and the contamination affected
wildlife including migrating whales and fishermen who got sick from the
contaminated water on the shores.

It seems that no matter how many years are spent in the oil extraction
business, that security measures to ensure that the oil doesn't pollute the
environment around the extraction places or pipes haven't grown at the same
rate than the need to use and consume oil. Maybe we need to rethink our use of
petroleum and demand accountability of the companies that exploit it.

**_This post is part of our special coverage[Forest Focus:
Amazon](https://globalvoicesonline.org/specialcoverage/forest-focus-
amazon/)._**

