The Blogtrotters are a [collaborative video
blog](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2010/03/15/france-blogtrotters-video-
blog-sheds-light-on-global-issues/) from France who in their 9th project are
travelling to Argentina to make [_Hijos_](http://www.blogtrotters.fr/nos-
aventures/9-hijos/), a collective documentary on the missing children of the
dictatorship, trying to trace back their origins to their disappeared parents.

[![patchwork of black and white portraits of disappeared
people](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2010/06/405761215_5f921046b2_b-225x300.jpg)](http://www.flickr.com/photos/ha_mas/405761215/)

Disappeared detainees CC-BY Ha+

On the [project website](http://www.blogtrotters.fr/nos-aventures/9-hijos/),
an introductory video explains what they intend to do with their online
documentary:

During their journey to Argentina they've been updating constantly through
their [twitter account](http://twitter.com/blogtrotters/), [facebook
page,](http://www.facebook.com/pages/Blogtrotters/110301525657619) [pictures
on flickr](http://www.flickr.com/photos/blogtrotters) and [website video
posts](http://www.blogtrotters.fr/category/argentine/). As they investigate,
capture images and videos or interview people, they are receiving real time
comments, suggestions and are generating conversations which in turn
determines what course the documentary will take.

As they [explain on their site](http://www.blogtrotters.fr/nos-
aventures/9-hijos/), this interaction with online citizens will extend their
initiative and broaden the topic:

> Les internautes pourront influencer le processus éditorial. Ils pourront
> nous suggérer des personnes à voir, des lieux à visiter, ou nous posez des
> questions. A charge pour nous d’hierachiser ces apports et d’intégrer cette
> participation sans nuire à la ligne éditoriale générale.

Online citizens will be involved in the edition process. They will be able to
suggest people to be interviewed, places to visit, or ask us questions. Our
task will be to grade these contributions according to their importance and to
include this participation without harming the main editorial line.

The Blogtrotters will be in Argentina from June 9th to June 22nd, and so far
there are [many videos uploaded on their
site](http://www.blogtrotters.fr/category/argentine/), which has a mechanical
translator option at the bottom if you can't read French.[ One of the videos
](http://www.blogtrotters.fr/2010/06/14/cimetiere-sans-morts/)[fr]takes us to
Memory Park in Argentina, where thousands of names with the age they were when
they were disappeared or killed are inscribed in stone walls so that families
can pay homage to their loved ones. The inscription on top of the wall reads:
these are the names of both the murdered and disappeared victims of state
terrorism and of those who died while fighting for the same ideals of justice
and equal rights.

They also visited the offices of a scientific NGO which is dedicated to
identifying remains that have been found in order to give peace of mind to
families who have waited decades to know the whereabouts of their disappeared
children and siblings. So far, 100 of the 500 newborns who disappeared while
the parents were kidnapped have been reunited with their families. Here is
their[ video interview](http://www.blogtrotters.fr/2010/06/16/ossements-en-
quete-d-identite/), this time held in English:

And in this other [heartwrenching interview
[fr]](http://www.blogtrotters.fr/2010/06/13/groupe-de-santa-cruz/), they speak
with Ana Maria Careaga, who herself was kidnapped when she was only 16, then
she was released and left the country in exile. Her mother, a member of the
[Mothers of the Plaza de Mayo
group](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mothers_of_the_Plaza_de_Mayo), remained in
Argentina and was killed as she was leaving Mass in the Church of Santa Cruz.

Thanks to Suzanne Lehn for her collaboration in translating content for this
post.

