**_This post is part of our special coverage[Egypt Revolution
2011](https://globalvoicesonline.org/specialcoverage/egypt-protests-2011/)._**

After seeing the huge impact of social media on the Egyptian revolution,
Egyptian blogger and Twitter user, [Mahmoud Salem](http://www.sandmonkey.org/)
(@[SandMonkey](http://twitter.com/Sandmonkey)) decided to collaborate with a
local non-profit organisation to help them raise funds using the power of
Twitter to offer basic services in an impoverished neighborhood of Cairo.

[Ezbet Khairalla](http://peaceandplenty-eg.org/whatwedo.php) is one of the
largest unplanned communities in Egypt, with a population close to 650,000
inhabitants. It is a sprawling area of about 12 square kilometres on a rocky
plateau that lies in the southern part of Cairo. Although Ezbet Khairalla is
located within the boundaries of Cairo, most basic services are missing; not
only sewage and garbage collection, but also inadequate education, poor health
and social services. Hence the densely populated area is considered fertile
soil for crime and social unrest.

[![Tweeps visited a kindergarten in Ezbet Khairallah, Cairo. Photo by
@pakinamamer \(July 30, 2011\)](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2011/08/e0lll-375x281.jpg)](http://yfrog.com/hse0lllj)

Tweeps visited a kindergarten in Ezbet Khairallah, Cairo. Photo by
@pakinamamer (July 30, 2011)

[![Ezbet Khairallah street](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2011/08/k17mbg-375x281.jpg)](http://yfrog.com/kfk17mbgj)

Snapshot of Ezbet Khairallah street by @pakinamamer on Yfrog

To help improve the quality of life in Ezbet Khairalla, _Khair Wa Baraka_
([Peace and Plenty](http://www.peaceandplenty-eg.org/)), an organisation
founded in 2004, started working on educational, health and environmental
programs, especially after their research showed that the most important issue
in the community was dealing with both solid and liquid waster (sewage). They
also provide medical caravans and pilot educational centres.

With the support of people on Twitter, Peace and Plenty and [raised EGP 2
million Egyptian pounds (over $330,000 US
dollars](http://www.sandmonkey.org/2011/07/14/the-first-tweetback-event-ezbet-
khairallah/) as well as awareness for the community. Salem called his
initiative “tweetback” (@[tweetbackevent](http://twitter.com/tweetbackevent)),
and it relied on the social capital of 20 of power-Twitter users who
collectively have around a quarter of a million followers. They each raised
money from donors in exchange for giving contributing companies PR among their
followers. They also created a buzz about the initiative and helped explain to
people [how they can help](http://www.peaceandplenty-eg.org/takeaction.php).

[![](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2011/08/TweetBackers-375x250.jpg)](https://www.facebook.com/pages/Rania-
Helmy-Photography/212368708788031)

Tweeting from the Tweetback event. Photo by Rania Helmy, a co-organiser.

Peace and Plenty held a fundraising event on July 26, 2011 at the Marriott
hotel in Cairo, [ where they
announced](http://twitter.com/#!/SherifRakabawy/status/95835264005574656) that
EGP 1,349,000 ($226,600) had already been raised.

The twitter users who were attending also [tweeted about each of the
donors](http://twitter.com/#!/AmrElGabry/status/95815945745997824) and how
much they donated, whether it was [a beverage
company](http://twitter.com/tweetbackevent/status/95815679936180224), a
[mobile
operator](http://twitter.com/#!/tweetbackevent/status/95815449555648512), or
even [donors who refused to reveal their
identities](http://twitter.com/#!/tweetbackevent/status/95816254228664320).
They also created a short-number for people to call to donate EGP 3 ($0.50),
and again [Twitter was used to spread the
info](http://twitter.com/tweetbackevent/status/101241656203939840).

The Tweetback organizers believe that this is only an initial step, and as
Salem [wrote in his blog](http://www.sandmonkey.org/2011/07/14/the-first-
tweetback-event-ezbet-khairallah/), “More of these initiatives will only
happen if you show support for this very first one, which by virtue of the
timing, and novelty, is in desperate need for your sponsorship.” Peace and
Plenty [called Ezbet Khairalla](http://www.peaceandplenty-
eg.org/whoweare.php), a prototype of an “unplanned community” in need of
development. Perhaps we will soon see more initiatives to help develop other
unplanned communities too.

**_This post is part of our special coverage[Egypt Revolution
2011](https://globalvoicesonline.org/specialcoverage/egypt-protests-2011/)._**

