In 2011 the world's population will exceed 7 billion people. To mark this
milestone, Global Voices has been commissioned by the [United Nations
Population Fund](http://unfpa.org/public/) (UNFPA) to write a series of posts
that celebrate how one person or group can still make a difference in a world
of 7 billion people. [The
stories](https://globalvoicesonline.org/-/special/7-billion-actions/), by
Global Voices authors in different countries, will form part of a global
campaign called [7 Billion Actions](http://7billionactions.org). Every story
will also be translated by [Lingua](https://globalvoicesonline.org/lingua)
into the UN languages French, Spanish, Russian, Chinese, and Arabic.

The challenges of keeping the world's people alive and healthy are many.

[![Young and old in Sri Lanka](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2011/08/srilanka2generations-375x249.jpg)](http://www.flickr.com/photos/michaelfoleyphotography/4368504455/)

Young and old in Sri Lanka by Michael Foley on Flickr (CC BY-NC-ND)

Nearly all of the population growth taking place (97 out of every 100 people)
is happening in less developed countries, where people are already vulnerable
and at risk from weather disasters, water and food insecurity. In wealthier
countries, people are concerned about low fertility, and ageing populations.
And across the world, the gaps between rich and poor are growing.

Global Voices covers the challenges of global development year round (see our
[special coverage on the Millenium Development
Goals](https://globalvoicesonline.org/specialcoverage/un-millennium-
development-goals-in-2011/)) but with this series we're looking forward to
trying something a little different. We'll be celebrating the positive
initiatives of individuals and organizations with short portraits that could
inspire action elsewhere. Women's rights, education, sustainable urban and
environmental development, are all issues that require urgent solutions, and
clearly citizens themselves need to be a part of them.

Our authors for this series are based in Malawi, Egypt, Lebanon, Zimbabwe,
Cuba, Brazil, and many more countries. Between them, they speak more than a
dozen languages. Through their writing and translating we hope to introduce
you to many new people, ideas and stories you won't hear about elsewhere!

**Visit[7 Billion Actions](http://7billionactions.org) to engage with the
campaign.**

_Here's a slideshow by the UNFPA about the population challenges ahead.  
_  

