For a period of four hours the [U.S. Secretary of
State,](http://www.state.gov/secretary/) Hillary Clinton, was an illustrious
guest in Quito, the capital of Ecuador. At noon, Clinton arrived at the
[Carondelet Palace,](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Palacio_de_Carondelet) the
headquarters of the Ecuadorian government, for a meeting with Ecuadorian
president and pro tempore head of the Union of South American Nations
(UNASUR), [Rafael Correa](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Rafael_Correa). In her
message, Clinton eloquently said, “[The U.S. wants to be a partner with
Ecuador and other countries to solve the problems of the XXI
century.](http://andes.info.ec/actualidad/clinton-y-correa-acuerdan-
transparentar-informacion-para-resolver-problemas-del-siglo-xxi-17447.html)”
[es]

[![](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2010/06/4682888151_1a15f322ed-375x249.jpg)](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2010/06/4682888151_1a15f322ed.jpg)

At the Yellow Room in the Carondelet Palace. Clinton and Correa during the
press conference. Photo by Presidencia de la República del Ecuador

Clinton met with Correa to discuss issues on immigration, cooperation, trade
and regional security, as the ambassador of Ecuador in the United States,[
Luis Gallegos, stated [es].](http://andes.info.ec/entrevistas/embajador-
gallegos-hay-que-perder-el-miedo-al-dialogo-con-las-potencias-17222.html)
Discussing the issue of immigration and the adoption of the so-called Arizona
Law was a priority in the agenda, stressed Gallegos. According to estimates,
about 2 million Ecuadorians live in the United States; therefore, addressing
the issue of immigration was paramount for Ecuadorians. Ecuador and Latin
America have to learn to not panic about engaging in dialogue with world
powers, Gallegos concluded.

The [_CRE_ Blog[es] ](http://www.cre.com.ec/Desktop.aspx?Id=143&e=140775)
summarizes what happened in Quito on June 8. For the most part, they say both
parts agreed to work together in order to achieve mutual aspirations. Correa
pointed out that conflicts do exist, but that all were resolved; he added that
they agreed on topics on the agenda, such as respect for democracy, the fight
against drug trafficking, and immigration. Correa also stated that after this
visit the two countries would work together with even greater momentum.

Twitter users aired their feelings about Clinton's visit to Ecuador. Some
users like [Pablo Cozzaglio [es]
](http://twitter.com/pablocozzaglio/status/15727419486)(@pablocozzaglio)
wondered:

> […] Qué buscarán los gringos, con ese súbito interés por Ecuador?

[…] What are the gringos looking for, with this sudden interest in Ecuador?

On the other hand, [Andy Martinez [es]
](http://twitter.com/andrs78/status/15730866229)(@andrs78) feels more
optimistic. He tweeted:

> Hillary Clinton en Ecuador….quizas algo esta cambiando?

Hillary Clinton in Ecuador …. maybe something is changing?

As a very important North American leader, Clinton raised tremendous
expectations. But not all Ecuadorians were happy with her visit. A [group of
leftist activists [es]](http://www.hoy.com.ec/noticias-ecuador/activistas-
pro%C2%85illary-clintonactivistas-protestan-contra-visita-de-hillary-
clinton-412320.html) protested outside the Carondelet Palace; they objected to
the visit of the U.S. Secretary of State and even burned a U.S. flag.
Protesters were identified as members of the Popular Democratic Movement
([MPD](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Movimiento_Popular_Democr%C3%A1tico)) and
the Marxist Leninist Communist Party of Ecuador
([PCMLE](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Marxist%E2%80%93Leninist_Communist_Party_of_Ecuador)).
They showed signs that read “Down with racist immigration law” and “H. Clinton
Out of Ecuador.”

However, Twitter user [Vicente Alvarado [es]
](http://twitter.com/Vic_Alvarado/status/15723033793) disagrees with
protesters. A tweet he sent read:

> Ecuador avanza en relaciones con USA… MPD atrasa pueblo,protestando contra
> de Clinton. Saben cuanto comercializamos con USA? Ignorantes

Ecuador progresses in its relations with USA … MPD holds people back,
protesting against Clinton. Do they know how much we sell to the USA?
Ignorants.

