![](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2010/05/majidTavakoli_poster.jpg)

This poster appears on many blogs. It says Majid Tavakoli is brave in the
fight against despotism.

Two bloggers and one leading student activist – deprived of their pen and
blogs in an Iranian prison – are now using a hunger strike to protest prison
conditions and defend their rights.

The student is [Majid
Tavakoli](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2009/12/12/iran-men-in-hijab-to-
support-jailed-student/), a leading human rights activist, and the two
bloggers are Hussein Ronagh Melki, and [Koohyar
Godarzi](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2010/01/31/iran-two-bloggers-in-
danger-of-death/).

Hussein Rongah Melki (also known as [“Babak
Khoramdin”](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2010/03/22/iran-new-wave-of-
blogger-arrests/)) was one of the key cyberactivists behind [Iran Proxy
](http://www.iraniazad.com/)against web filtering. He used to [blog
about](http://www.rosva.co.cc/) [fa] about human rights and civil society.

When Tavakoli was arrested in December, he was photographed in women's
clothing by the authorities as an attempt to humiliate him. As an expression
of support, countless Iranians photographed themselves [dressed in
hijab](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2009/12/12/iran-men-in-hijab-to-support-
jailed-student/) and replaced their Facebook profile photos.

The last post in Kouhyar Godarzi's blog in April 2008 [calls on
readers](http://kouhyar.wordpress.com/2008/04/06/akram/) to help stop an
execution.

After the contested Iranian presidential election in June last year, the
Iranian government quelled protests and arrested hundreds of political and
civil society leaders, including human rights activists, bloggers and
journalists.

Majid and Hussein began their hunger strikes on May 23 from solitary
confinement. [According
to](http://www.rferl.org/content/Health_Concerns_Surround_Majid_Tavakoli_Heart_Of_Irans_Student_Movement/2053608.html)
Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty, news of Majid Tavakoli's hunger strike has
caused human rights activists and intellectuals in Europe, the United States,
Canada and Australia, to announce their own solidarity hunger-strikes.

Iranian blogger _Sight_ [writes](http://balatariny.blogspot.com/2010/05/blog-
post_27.html) [Fa]:

> Stop your hunger strike Majid. I am not deserving of you to sacrifice your
> life for me. If you would not be here, I do not want the Spring. Stay with
> us Majid, stay.

_Marjan Tehran_ [writes](http://coral49.wordpress.com/) [Fa]:

> Majid should not be forgotten. From the moment he came to the university
> until he was arrested, he struggled {for freedom] now it's his friends and
> campaigners’ turn to do their best and not to forget him.

Iranian authorities [have jailed
](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2008/12/18/iran-a-long-and-painful-story-of-
jailed-bloggers/)several bloggers in recent years, including [Hossien
Derakhshan ](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2009/11/02/iran-free-hossein-
derakhshan/) who also still remains in prison.

[Omid Reza Mir Sayafi](http://www.march18.org/), a 29-year old Iranian blogger
and journalist died in Evin Prison in Tehran on March 18, 2009.

