The floods of the past weeks affecting Central and Eastern Europe are not over
yet. MTI, a Hungarian news agency,
[reported](http://www.portfolio.hu/en/cikkek.tdp?feed=1&k=2&i=20183) that
since May 15 temporary flood protection arrangements had to be implemented on
930 km of riverbanks, using 3.6 million sandbags and asking for more from EU
civil protection mechanism. Hungary has been offered 2.12 million sandbags by
Austria, Croatia, the Czech Republic, Denmark, Germany and the Netherlands.

Bloggers took photos around their homes in areas affected by the natural
disaster. One of them was Basesoft from
[Szikszó](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sziksz%C3%B3), a town in northern
Hungary. He wrote in a [comment](http://odf.hu/belfold/szikszo-arviz/comment-
page-1#comment-11) (HUN) on his [blog](http://odf.hu/belfold/szikszo-arviz)
(HUN) that the photos did not show the worst situation since they didn't have
the time to take photos then.

[![](http://odf.hu/wp-
content/uploads/2010/05/DSCF6296.jpg)](http://odf.hu/belfold/szikszo-
arviz/comment-page-1#comment-10)

Photo courtesy of Basesoft

Zsolt Szentirmai posted a [series of
photos](http://pwsdesign.com/photos/%C3%81rv%C3%ADz_S%C3%A1toralja%C3%BAjhely/index.html)
on the flood at
[Sátoraljaújhely](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/S%C3%A1toralja%C3%BAjhely),
also in northern Hungary, close to the Slovak border.

HL from [Heréd](http://hu.wikipedia.org/wiki/Her%C3%A9d) (HUN) posted three
times (HUN,
[here](http://heredforum.freeblog.hu/archives/2010/05/17/Arviz_a_faluban_-_1/),
[here](http://heredforum.freeblog.hu/archives/2010/05/17/Arviz_a_faluban_-_2/)
and
[here](http://heredforum.freeblog.hu/archives/2010/05/20/Arviz_a_faluban_-_3/)),
adding photos on the flood and the flood protection works.

This piece also shows pictures and short videos, reporting in the first part
that in the area called
[Transdanubia](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Transdanubia) and the mountains in
the north of the country it rained 20 to 60 mm, at some places reaching 86 mm.
The short videos show areas in the country that are the most affected by the
recent floods. [Bantabas](http://www.youtube.com/user/bantabas), who made the
video, added in the description and on some images that those who see the
video should help anywhere they can.

