[![CC BY Teufelgt](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2010/05/3267847287_a7dbd19861_m.jpg)](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2010/05/3267847287_a7dbd19861_m.jpg)

CC BY Teufelgt

Regions in Guatemala are in a “[state of
calamity”](http://www.guatemala.gob.gt/noticia4.php?codigo=7827&titulo2=Nacionales)
as declared by President Colom after the Pacaya volcano, 25 miles south of
Guatemala City, increased its activity. (All links lead to articles in Spanish
unless marked otherwise)

Yesterday the [The Pacaya[en]](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pacaya "The
Pacaya") volcano increased its activity after a small earthquake; the arrival
of a tropical storm on top of that generated a dangerous combination of
falling water, ashes and stones. Today the situation is much more serious as
the two small earthquakes, the tropical storm and the erupting volcano take
their toll on the population. More than 30 different traffic accidents have
been caused by the ash the low visibility and rain, 3 people are missing and
[one has been reported
dead](http://cobannoticioso.blogspot.com/2010/05/anibal-archila-fue-
encontrado-sin-vida.html "one has been reported dead"): the body of Anibal
Arcila, a cameraman who was hit on the head by falling debris from the volcano
while reporting on the explosion, was found [while netizens tuned into online
streaming channels](http://twitter.com/#search?q=periodista%20pacaya "while
netizens  tuned into online streaming channels"). Twenty others have been
reported as injured, towns are being evacuated.

Discussion of the developing events have taken place in
[blogs](http://blogsearch.google.com/blogsearch?hl=en&ie=UTF-8&q=pacaya&btnG=Search+Blogs),
[twitter](http://twitter.com/search#search?q=pacaya),
[identi.ca](http://search.identi.ca/#q=pacaya) accounts (using hashtag
#Pacaya), and [even a rock music forum
](http://www.rockrepublik.net/post/260878/ "even a forum by the rock
community"). Ash falling from the sky is not uncommon in Guatemala, but it's a
first for Guatemala City. The airport was closed until the 31st, due to the
rocky muck on the ground and ash in the air, possibly reminding people of the
ash cloud generated by Iceland's Eyjafjallajökull volcano which interrupted
air travel in Europe last month.

Pacaya Volcano is a [popular touristic
destination](http://www.rutahsa.com/pacaya.html)[en] and people walk next to
lava flows, roast marshmallows and hike the area. So what does this increased
activity look like?[ Vivo en Guatemala](http://vivoenguatemala.wordpress.com/)
reported:

> Actualmente se producen explosiones cada segundo y alcanzan hasta 500 metros
> de altura sobre el cráter. Las columnas de ceniza llegan hasta 1 mil 500
> metros de altura y se dispersan hacia el Oeste y Sur-Oeste sobre las aldeas
> El Rodeo y El Patrocinio. También se reporta caída de ceniza en Amatitán,
> San Francisco de Sales, Calderas, Los Pocitos y San Vicente Pacaya.

Currently, explosions are taking place every second and can reach 500 meters
above the crater surface. The ash columns are reaching 1500 meters of height
and are dispersing towards the West and South West over the villages of El
Rodeo and El Patrocinio. Ash precipitation is also reported in Amatitán, San
Francisco of Sales, Calderas, Los Pocitos and San Vicente Pacaya.

[The Guatemalan Firemen Squad](http://www.noticiasdebomberosguatemala.com/)
report on their blog that many highly populated suburbs including Amatitlan,
Villa Nueva and San Miguel Petapa are severely affected by the sand. [Blogger
Chitiore](http://chitiore.com/2010/05/27/lluvia-de-ceniza-en-guatemala-a-
causa-de-erupcion-del-volcan-pacaya/) provides [pictures of the black sand
falling from the
sky](http://www.flickr.com/photos/chitiore/4646587814/in/set-72157624026827589/
"pictures of the black sand falling from the sky") videos and useful links to
keep yourself informed about this developing situation.

Up until yesterday, the ash that fell over the city was something of an
amusing event, although not completely uncommon in Guatemala, as can be seen
in the [following video](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=vvfV_Sv5flU) where a
young man stands outside while dry ash hisses as it hits the roofs and other
surfaces.

In this next video a sedate[ Tessy
Caspine](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=a0x6qAH42Hk) shows the ash that falls
in her yard and covers everything in a coal black slush. In some areas of the
city it has reached 2 or 3 inches deep and has caused car crashes.

You can follow the unfolding events hrough online streaming video of [this
Guatemalan TV news channel](http://www.ustream.tv/channel/delvalle-show). Also
through CONRED, the Guatemalan National Disaster Prevention Commission, as it
is constantly updating their [Facebook
page](http://www.facebook.com/pages/Guatemala-City-
Guatemala/Conred/358445480348) and [Twitter
account](http://twitter.com/conredguatemala) with information, including [ a
map of the communities
affected](http://www.facebook.com/photo.php?pid=3983601&id=358445480348 "here
is a map of the communities affected") by the emergency.

Renata Ávila collaborated with content for this post.

