Argentina has been celebrating 200th anniversary of the beginning of the
process of emancipation from Spain, which started back on May 25, 1810. At the
time, a local committee decided to remove the Spanish viceroy and to begin the
[process of creating and independent
government](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Primera_Junta). As part of the
celebrations, between May 21-25, there will be multiple activities, stands
from the different Argentinean Provinces, shows, and the reopening of [the
Colón Theater](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Colon_Theater). Hundreds of
thousands of people are participating of the activities, which will take place
until next Tuesday where people will gather at 9 de Julio Avenue near the
[Obelisk](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Obelisk_of_Buenos_Aires) in the
capital, Buenos Aires.

[![](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2010/05/bsas.jpg)](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2010/05/bsas.jpg)

Photo of the Obelisk in Buenos Aires by nscap and used under a Creative
Commons license.

To cover the festivities using online tools, a group of bloggers created the
site _[Tu Bicentenario [es]](http://blog.tubicentenario.com.ar) _(Your
Bicentennial), where they combine different web services to create real-time
coverage, with the hashtag [#bicentenarioarg
[es]](http://search.twitter.com/search?q=%23bicentenarioarg). In this short
interview, [Vanina Berghella [es]](http://www.lapropaladora.com), [Nicolás
Piccoli](http://sicrono.com/), and [Alvaro Liuzzi
[es]](http://segundoplanoblog.blogspot.com) spoke about the project's goals.

**Global Voices: What are going to be the main differences that Tu
Bicentenario will have in the type of coverage compared to traditional media?
These will most likely appeal to “social media” too.**

It's true, this year the media is starting to use these tools, but they will
not be their main focus, but a complement. Our idea is to approach the user
who is more aware of the Web and “social media” tools. We we will focus on
those who are interested in “real time” and those who observe the details.

[![](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2010/05/logo.png)](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2010/05/logo.png)**GV: What were the main difficulties in
integrating so many tools? What kind of challenges did you find? What things
did you want to add that will not be on the site?**

The first challenge was to think about and draft how the homepage of the site
would look like. We wanted to have all applications be visible, so that users
could navigate to the applications of their choice. We were lucky to count on
the interactive agency Genes who was interested in the project and they helped
with the development and integration of all the tools. They worked really well
with all chosen applications (Facebook, Twitter, Vimeo, YouTube, Flickr and
WordPress).

**GV: What kind of coverage do you have in mind for May 24 and 25?  
**

The coverage in the area of festivities starts on Saturday 22nd until the
25th. The [agenda
[es]](http://blog.tubicentenario.com.ar/index.php/2010/04/agenda-bicentenario)
is full of events and activities, that's why our idea is to divide the areas
of coverage and schedules. We will mostly use Twitter and Facebook from there.
Our idea is to take advantage of mobile applications and to share what we
observe from every place where we'll be located.

**GV: Once the Bicentennial event is over, do you have something in mind for
all the gathered material? Some kind of product maybe?**

We already decided we'll be creating content during the entire year of the
Bicentennial. There will be more ceremonies and commemorations and we believe
the project deserves to go on.

**GV: This year will be the Bicentennial of the Independence of several Latin
American countries. Do you know of any similar initiative in other
countries?**

We haven't found similar projects in Latin America. We were somewhat inspired
by [The Berlin Project](http://www.theberlinproject.com), which covered the
anniversary of the Fall of the Berlin Wall in November 2009.

