On May, 20th 2010, sustained [gun battles between rival armed
forces](http://en.rsf.org/madagascar-soldiers-vandalise-radio-
studio-17-05-2010,37493.html) lasted for an hour in the capital city of
Madagascar, Antananarivo. The ongoing political crisis has once again erupted
into violence as a report from the local Red Cross states that at least [three
people were wounded in the clash](http://fr.news.yahoo.com/4/20100520/twl-
madagascar-crise-bd5ae06.html) (fr). A gathering composed of hundred civilians
and backed by a dissident faction of the police (Forces d'Intervention de la
Gendarmerie Nationale: FIGN) was surrounded by a unit of the army (état-major
mixte opérationnel régional: Emmo-Reg), then fires were exchanged. The FIGN
leader colonel Raymond Andrianjafy explained that [the reason for the
gathering at Andrainarivo-Mausolée](http://www.madagascar-tribune.com/Rendez-
vous-avec-la-population-a,14081.html), was to allow civilians to voice their
disapproval of the current situation and try to find a solution to the crisis
(fr). The FIGN was there to prevent the gathering from being repressed, he
said.

**Update:** Madagascar Tribune reports that there were a total of [four fatal
casualties ](http://www.madagascar-tribune.com/Le-mouvement-des-
ecclesiastiques,14096.html)from the gun battles (fr). Preacher Rivo Arison
Ranaivo was among the victims as [a communique from the Association of the
Protestant Churches](http://bit.ly/aJ0WeZ) confirmed (fr).

The clash comes a few days after [a local radio was attacked
](http://en.rsf.org/madagascar-soldiers-vandalise-radio-
studio-17-05-2010,37493.html)by a special unit of the army on May 17th while
an opposition leader Ambroise Ravonison and another on-air guest, Harrison
Razafindrakoto [were interviewed on a live
broadcast](http://cpj.org/2010/05/soldiers-raid-madagascar-radio-station-
assault-sta.php).

Bloggers and twitterers in Madagascar were first to report the gun shots in
the morning:

_Pierre Maury_ in Antananarivo tweeted that the [gun shots started at 9:42
am](http://twitter.com/pmalgachie/status/14345162859) local time were intense
and [lasted for at least 45
minutes](http://twitter.com/pmalgachie/status/14348634746).

_InvestGasy_ reported that [three military
trucks](http://twitter.com/investgasy/status/14349877081) were seen
approaching the meeting point and that a [few stores
downtown](http://twitter.com/investgasy/status/14349294672) have closed.

_Jentilisa_ who was at the gathering posted the [following update at 11 am
local time](http://twitter.com/jentilisa/status/14352045610) (mg):

> Tsy tafiditra Mausolée intsony ny olona saiky hankao taorian'ny fanafihana
> teo. Manohy ny hira sy ny vavaka izay efa tafiditra Mausolée

People cannot enter the Mausolee anymore after the confrontation. Those who
are inside have resumed the singing and prayers.

_Ranjachrys_ , also on site, confirmed that the [group prayers have
continued](http://twitter.com/ranjachrys/status/14352332004) while the clash
occurred. He also reports that [a preacher has been
arrested](http://twitter.com/ranjachrys/status/14354734425) afterwards.

_[Tomavana](http://twitter.com/tomavana)_ , a blogger residing in Geneva, has
amplified the updates from local bloggers on different social media platforms
and compiled an extensive [timeline of the events](http://ff.im/kBWVN) as told
by twitterers:

[![](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-content/uploads/2010/05/twitter-
Madagascar-300x198.jpg)](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2010/05/twitter-Madagascar.jpg)

archives of twitter updates from Madagascar

Twitterers _Tomavana_ , [Sameganegie](http://twitter.com/sameganegie) and
[Dotmg](http://twitter.com/dotmg) are urging people to be aware that a lot of
the so-called information that are heard on various radios and twitter updates
should be taken with cautious skepticism. Many of those were proven to be
either inaccurate or pure propaganda. They have coined the hash tag [#fvtm
](http://twitter.com/#search?q=fvtm)( short for: filazana vaovao tsy marina
that translates to “signaling false information”) on twitter to highlights
false information.

The situation is still developing and we will provide updates here as more
reports are confirmed.

Here are real-time [twitter updates that contain
#Madagascar](http://twitter.com/#search?q=%23Madagascar).

