It has been over 20 days since the students of the largest campus (in Río
Piedras) of the state-run University of Puerto Rico (UPR) paralyzed the
academic operations in order to protest against a [$100 million budget cut and
the proposed elimination of certain registration and fee
waivers](http://www.prdailysun.com/news/UPR-wont-seek-formula-adjustment-
still-seeking-alternatives) [EN]. Ten of the 11 campuses of the UPR in the
Island have already joined the Río Piedras students. The Students Negotiating
Committee initiated a dialogue with members of the Board of Trustees, [but the
agreements were not approved in the general assembly celebrated
yesterday](http://www.prdailysun.com/news/UPR-student-strike-regains-momentum)
[EN]. An overwhelming majority of the students (over 2,500 students attended,
which is the quorum for the approximately 20,000 students at the Río Piedras
campus) ratified an indefinite strike.

[![](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-content/uploads/2010/05/UPR-
policia.jpg)](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-content/uploads/2010/05/UPR-
policia.jpg)

Students offer flowers to police officers. Photo by Ricardo Alcaraz of
Diálogo. Republished under a CC License.

Today, one day after the student assembly, special police forces have
surrounded the Río Piedras campus. Students who are inside the campus have
been locked in, and students at the gates that surround the campus are waiting
to see what is going to happen. This morning, [the father of a student was
beaten and arrested by police officers when he brought food to his
son](http://dialogodigital.com/es/upr-extramuros/2010/05/policia-golpea-
arresta-padre-que-llevaba-comida-hijo-upr-rp) [ES]. Later during the day, the
district court of San Juan did not rule in favor of the petition of permitting
the delivery of food and water to students inside the campus.

Other acts of police violence have been registered during the day, such as
[the beating of the student José Pérez](<object width="640"
height="385"><param name="movie"
value="http://www.youtube.com/v/hGAFUHqhYVU&hl=en_US&fs=1&"></param><param
name="allowFullScreen" value="true"></param><param name="allowscriptaccess"
value="always"></param><embed src=). Also today, the President of the UPR's
Board of Trustees, Ygrí Rivera, announced that the the Río Piedras campus
would close until July 31. In the meantime, artists, activists, and professors
have joined and supported the students who are protesting in Río Piedras. As
the situation reaches larger proportions, leaders of various trade unions have
announced that they plan to organize [a national strike next Tuesday, May
18](http://www.primerahora.com/huelgaenlaupr,dia22,minutoaminuto:paronacionalconvocadoparaelmartes-387498.html)
[ES].

[![](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-content/uploads/2010/05/Agresion-
UPR.jpg)](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-content/uploads/2010/05/Agresion-
UPR.jpg)

Heated moment at the Río Piedras Campus. Photo by Ricardo Alcaraz of Diálogo.
Republished under a CC License.

Professor and blogger Mario Nuñez Molina (@digizen) [has prepared a list of
citizen media in Puerto Rico covering the student
strike](http://www.vidadigital.net/blog/2010/05/10/recursos-para-estar-al-da-
con-la-huelga-de-la-upr/) [ES]. Some of them are: the Río Piedras students
blog _[Desde adentro](http://rojogallito.blogspot.com/)_ [ES] and live radio
and streaming of students reporting from Río Piedras through _[Radio
Huelga](http://radiohuelga.com/wordpress/)_ [ES]. _[UPR es un
país](http://www.upresunpais.com/)_ [ES] is aggregating the digital citizen
and alternative media resources. The hashtags
[#paroUPR](http://twitter.com/#search?q=%23paroupr),
[#huelgaUPR](http://twitter.com/#search?q=%23huelgaupr), and
[#radiohuelga](http://twitter.com/#search?q=%23radiohuelga) are being used to
discuss and follow the student protests on Twitter. Students of the Mayagüez
(on the west coast of the Island) campus are using
[@luchasrum](http://twitter.com/luchasrum) and the blog _[Luchas en el
RUM](http://luchasrum.wordpress.com/)_ [ES] to inform about their events. UPR
Río Piedras Law professor [Erika Fontánez is
blogging](http://poderyambiente.blogspot.com/) daily about the situation. The
UPR's monthly newspaper [Diálogo is also covering the student
strike](http://dialogodigital.com/es/inicio). The alternative weekly [Claridad
is live-streaming the student strike](http://www.claridadpuertorico.com/) (you
have to register first in order to have access). Mainstream media in Puerto
Rico, such as [Primera Hora](http://www.primerahora.com/) and [El Nuevo
Día](../2010/04/30/puerto-rico-students-speak-for-themselves-through-the-
net/www.elnuevodia.com), are publishing minute by minute accounts of the
events related to the UPR's situation.

Please see more Global Voices’ coverage of the student strike
[here](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2010/04/30/puerto-rico-students-speak-
for-themselves-through-the-net/).

