One of the most recognizable buildings in Japan, the grand, old [Kabuki-
za](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Kabuki-za) in Ginza is closing this month. It
will be torn down and become a theater and office complex with direct
connections to the subway station. Be sure to click this
[link](http://www.kabuki-za.co.jp/rebuild/index.html) to see a sketch of the
planned exterior. It's the third image on the page, you can't miss it.

[![Kabuki-za at night by Ali San](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2010/04/kabukiza.jpg)](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2010/04/29/japan-
kabuki-theatre-to-be-rebuilt/kabukiza/)

Kabuki-za at night by Ali San

The Kabuki-za opened in 1889. The current theater was built in 1951 after the
previous building was burned down by [U.S. Air Forces during World War
II](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bombing_of_Tokyo).

[Shochiku Company, Limited](http://www.shochikufilms.com/), the landowner and
operator of the theater started talks of rebuilding in 2005. The main reason
given for the construction is that the building doesn't have sufficient
protection against natural disasters, especially earthquakes.

The theater, a cultural landmark, is registered as a Tangible Cultural
Property.

[![kabukiza*West Wing\(3F\) by tenugui](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2010/04/kabukiza2.jpg)](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2010/04/29/japan-
kabuki-theatre-to-be-rebuilt/kabukiza2/)

kabukiza*West Wing(3F) by tenugui

Shochiku ran a series of “farewell performances”. Yoko Ishikura lined up for
one and [remarks](http://www.yokoishikura.com/english/?p=1594):

> I thoroughly enjoyed watching both shows, and did not mind standing for over
> 3.5 hours altogether. Beauty and art is so inspiring that you feel that the
> life is worth living.

An electronic countdown clock was set up in front of the theatre, where many
people [took photos](http://yuzudiary2.exblog.jp/12538138/). Yuzu says:

> 歌舞伎がずーっと後世へと引き継がれるには、今建て替えが必要なんですよね。
>
> どのように生まれ変わるのか楽しみですね

I understand that it's necessary to rebuild the theater for Kabuki to be
passed to the next generation. I look forward to seeing it complete!

[L-Komachi](http://d.hatena.ne.jp/L-Komachi/20100424/1272111838):

>
> 私にとって、現在の歌舞伎座で観る、最後の歌舞伎になります。歌舞伎座前のカウントダウン時計の残り日数も一桁になっていました。歌舞伎座の前で、建物やカウントダウン時計を記念撮影している人も多かったです。[…]
> 「御名残四月大歌舞伎」を全3部を観て、改めて、歌舞伎の面白さを再認識しました。歌舞伎座は建て替えのためしばらく休場となりますが、歌舞伎は見続けることになると思います。

This will be last performance that I see at the current Kabuki-za. The
countdown clock is down to one digit, and many people were taking photos in
front of the building and the clock. […] Watching the three acts of the “April
Farewell to Kabuki-za” made me realize yet again the joy of Kabuki. Kabuki-za
will be closed for a while, but I will keep on watching Kabuki.

How will we feel in 2013 when the renovation is complete and we gaze up
towards the 20+ office floors glittering right above our beloved Kabuki-za?

Blogger [gohermes](http://ameblo.jp/gohermes/entry-10515631976.html) is
reminded of The Executive Centre Tokyo Bankers Club Building (東京銀行協会ビル) in the
Marunouchi area. This building has the unfortunate moniker of “scab
architecture” (かさぶた建築) and [Kyo wonders](http://glst.jugem.jp/?eid=693):

[![The Executive Centre Tokyo Bankers Club
Building](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2010/04/center.jpg)](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2010/04/29/japan-
kabuki-theatre-to-be-rebuilt/center/)

The Executive Centre Tokyo Bankers Club Building

>
> 調べたところ、建物自体の問題で全面保存はできなかったようです。こんな形でも残ってよかったのか、跡形もなく消えてしまった方がよかったのか、難しいところです。

It seems that completely resurrecting this building was not possible due to
structural issues. Was it better to preserve the building in this way? Or
would it have been better to just… let it go? I'm really not sure.

Again, here's the [link](http://www.kabuki-za.co.jp/rebuild/index.html) of the
new Kabuki-za.

