[![Global Voices 3.0 R.I.P \(click for larger
image\)](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2010/04/globalvoices-pre-
update-300x259.png)](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2010/04/globalvoices-pre-update.png)

Global Voices 3.0 R.I.P (click for larger image)

As you may have noticed, a few things have changed here at Global Voices. Our
old design, beloved as it was, has been replaced. I have been working for over
a year with the Global Voices community on this massive overhaul of how our
site looks and works, and we're excited to share it with you today.

For nostalgic readers the screenshot to the right shows the site as it looked
just before the update.

### Now truly multilingual

Global Voices is one of the most multilingual online communities in the world.
Our [Lingua project](https://globalvoicesonline.org/lingua/ "Global Voices
Lingua - our translation project"), where people from around the world
volunteer to translate Global Voices content into different languages, has
experienced astounding growth since it began 3 years ago. We now have over
30,000 translations posted in a slew of different languages, some of which
you've probably never even heard of. As a developer this growth was almost
difficult to believe, and presented many challenges, but when you're in the
business of spreading citizen media as far and wide as possible, growth like
that is an amazing problem to have.

The original Lingua sites were very simplified versions of the English
website. When we first developed the system we didn't know how much it would
end up being used, nor how best to integrate the translations with the English
originals. Over time it became clear that the only way to show the respect and
care our translation sites deserved was to integrate them more deeply with the
English site. Each Lingua site needed to be an equal member of a global
translation network, rather than a sub-site of an English original.

![Redesign in Chinese and Arabic](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2010/04/gv-redesign-zh-ar.png)

Redesign in Chinese and Arabic

That bit of rhetoric has been converted into code and is now a reality. This
total redesign is being launched simultaneously on all of our Lingua sites,
and its features apply to all equally. To cement this commitment the English
version of Global Voices is now labeled as such in its own header, just like
the other Lingua sites.

The translation system itself has been completely rewritten, allowing for
translations to _or_ from the English site, as well as chained translations
between multiple sites. I've also simplified the process of translating posts
immensely, from a 10-step nightmare begging for human error to the 1-step
process that it should have been from the start.

It's never been easier or sexier to be a Global Voices translator, if you
tried it before and thought it was too hard then give it another chance now!
If you're a polyglot who's never translated for fun then get in touch with the
Lingua site for your language and see what all the excitement is about.

### What else is new?

In many ways the site is the same as always, just prettier, clearer and easier
to use. This update wasn't about adding new features so much as making the
existing ones more effective and available to all the Lingua sites.

One major change is that the whole site is now _fluid-width_ , a web-design
term that means it stretches based on your window size. This feature was
chosen to make our site as accessible as possible to all our visitors
regardless of their hardware. Try resizing your browser to see the effect.
Global Voices should look great on on huge monitors, tiny netbooks and that
awful 15″ CRT at the internet café.

We also switched search tools from a basic Google site search to an integrated
search that displays results more usefully to readers.

### Open Source and WordPress

The site, theme and translation system are built entirely on top of the open-
source [WordPress](http://wordpress.org/ "WordPress ") platform using lots of
custom theme and plugin code, as well as various awesome plugins from the
WordPress community.

While coding the redesign and new Lingua system I've also taken time to give
back to the community we depend on with [several
patches](http://core.trac.wordpress.org/search?q=props+jeremyclarke+&noquickjump=1&ticket=on&changeset=on&milestone=on&wiki=on
"List of patches written by me on behalf of Global Voices that were committed
to wordpress core") to fix problems and fill in missing features in the core
of WordPress.

I'm proud to say that Global Voices supports open-source and my contributions
back to the tools that make this site possible.

### We hope you like it.

It's been years in the making and our entire community has pitched in to lay
out the principles and work out the details of this redesign. We hope you, our
readers, think it's as much of an improvement as we do and that it helps you
enjoy the stories we share even more.

