Today the Danish Prime Minister [Lars Løkke
Rasmussen](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lars_Løkke_Rasmussen) has finally let
the Danes out of suspense [by calling the parliamentary
elections](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Danish_parliamentary_election,_2011#Date_of_the_election):
the big day is already in three weeks, on September 15.

The announcement was a relief to many. Already in the spring rumors started
circulating that the election was just around the corner, and some of the
Danish media even predicted that it would happen before the summer holidays
(the Danish Parliament is officially on vacation from mid-June to the first
Tuesday of October). This last week before the announcement of the election
date has been characterized by impatience, and Danish netizens have expressed
themselves through humorous online statements.

**There Will Never Be Elections, Ever**

The Tumblr page
‘[therewillneverbeelectionsever!](http://derbliveraldrigvalgever.tumblr.com/)’
( _derbliveraldrigvalgever.tumblr.com_ ) [da] was launched a couple of weeks
ago and is now filled with examples of manipulated commercials, pictures and
audio, claiming in a sarcastic tone that the elections will never come. One of
the popular pieces is the edited version of the Prime Minister’s New Year's
speech: “We must have the elections. This is written in the Constitution. But
I guarantee you…that it will never happen,” the Prime Minister says in a
solemn voice. The Tumblr page now has nearly 3,700 “likes” on Facebook.

by Christian Panton[![](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2011/08/valgknappen-375x259.png)](http://valgknappen.dk/)

A screenshot of the Election Button

Another popular gadget, the ‘[Election Button](http://valgknappen.dk/)’ (
_valgknappen.dk_ ) [da], was created by a computer science student [Christian
Panton](https://www.facebook.com/home.php#!/christianpanton) earlier this
week. It is a simple page with a single button and a short text: “27,152 Danes
have already pressed the election button. Now we’re just waiting for Lars
Løkke Rasmussen.”

The current government took office in 2001 and was re-elected for its third
term in the last elections in 2007.

