In Paraguay, where only [3% of the population has access to internet
[es]](http://www.ultimahora.com/notas/312260-jóvenes-paraguayos-son-los---
últimos--en-acceder--a-internet) and where the [indigenous language of Guaraní
](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Paraguayan_Guaran%C3%AD)is spoken by 88% of the
population and also an official state language, Mirta Martínez saw an
opportunity where nobody else did. A journalist and a Guaraní teacher, she
became the [first and only blogger writing in
Guaraní](http://lenguaguarani.blogspot.com/2010/04/diccionario-guarani-
castellano-nee-ayvu.html) in the world, captivating readers not only in
Paraguay but also around the globe.

[![Mirta Martínez](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2010/04/mm2.jpg)](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2010/04/mm2.jpg)

Mirta Martínez

Guaraní is a language originally spoken by the [Guaraní
people](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Guaran%C3%AD), a local indigenous
community that inhabits Paraguay, and parts of Argentina, Brasil and Bolivia.
Although Guaraní spread all the way through these countries, today it is most
widely spoken in Paraguay, together with Spanish (brought by the Spaniards
when they invaded South America). The remaining Guaraní indigenous population
in Paraguay is now very small, but most Paraguayan citizens inherited their
language. Up until a few years ago, Guaraní was considered a language spoken
only by “lower class citizens,” and people from the country side. It was only
in 1992 that an educational reform made it mandatory that classes should be
taught both in Guaraní and Spanish.

[![Photo courtesy of Mirta Martínez](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2010/04/mm.jpg)](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2010/04/mm.jpg)

Photo courtesy of Mirta Martínez

Martinez figured out that internet could be a great way to spread the Guaraní
language, so she presented a project to her bosses at ABC Color, the largest
nationally distributed newspaper, to make[ a Guaraní version of the online
version of the newspaper](http://www.abc.com.py/abc/seccion/marandu/) and to
write a blog in the Guaraní language, and it was approved. Today, people from
all over the world who are fascinated by this beautiful language get in direct
contact with Martinez through her blog [ABC
Rogue.](http://archivo.abc.com.py/blogs/autor/41/mirta-martinez)

The following is an interview with this visionary journalist:

**Global Voices: You are the first person blogging in Guaraní…**

**Mirta Martínez:** Yes, this year it’s going to be 10 years that I've been
writing news for the Guaraní online version of the paper called Marandu (news)
and since October 2008 we have the first and only blog in Guaraní. Many topics
get covered in the blog, you will find posts on (US President Barack) Obama
and (Paraguayan President Fernando) Lugo, they both surprised everybody when
they got elected… we also talk about health issues such as the H1N1 virus. Any
topic that impacts me and that I believe can be of general interest.

I can tell you that the readers of this blog made it their own.

As an anecdote, last year a French-Paraguayan reader visited Paraguay, he is
one of the assiduous readers of my blog _ABC Rogue_ , Oscar Uberti. He’s a
retired engineer and he’s very interested in the Guaraní language, so he
started writing a Guaraní dictionary based on the technical vocabulary
engineers use. So he uses the blog to learn and speak with other Guaraní
speakers while in France.

**GV: Being the majority of the population Guaraní speakers, why do you think
there is only one blog in Guaraní?**

**MM:** First of all one has to be in constant training and moreover keeping
up with the new technology tools that develop new spaces for the spread of
language. Also, to be able to write in a newspaper one has to have
journalistic skills and education, and you must love it. Working in a
newspaper requires a lot of sacrifice, because it absorbs plenty of time and
your family must collaborate by providing trust and balance. I’m now finishing
my Masters degree in Guaraní, I would be part of the first graduating class,
and there are 30 of us classmates, among them poets, journalists and
professors.

**GV: Who reads your blog more, Paraguayans or foreigners?**

**MM:** The ones who read my blog are mainly from foreign countries, students
at universities from Japan, United States, Kiel y Mainz, (Germany) students in
Canada. Also Paraguayans who live in Spain, Brazil, and in Paraguay, people
who admire the language and Guaraní students. Also people who are surprised to
find the blog, it’s a novelty. Nobody ever imagined that this could be done.

**GV: Do you think the amount of blogs in Guaraní will increase?**

**MM:** I believe they will increase, there are a lot of people who write well
and there are very good journalists who had studied Guaraní to be able to
write blogs, but until now they hold back from doing it, it seems like I’m the
only one who isn’t afraid of making mistakes.

It’s just a matter of taking the courage to do it. It will make me very happy
because it is a space given to a language that still many feel ashamed of
having or speaking. And they haven’t realized the value of expression that
emerges from the same words that describe the teko (essence) of the human
being.

