April 10, 2010, the day that should have started a new era in the Russian-
Polish relations, brought [tragic
news](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/2010_Polish_Air_Force_Tu-154_crash) [EN]
instead. Airplane with the highest Polish establishment on board crashed in
the Smolensk forest. The reaction of the Russian blogosphere was divided as
usual when it comes to the Russian-Polish relations.

The discussion went into several directions: 1) copy-pasting of the news, 2)
figuring out whose fault it was, 3) messages of sorrow and solidarity with the
Polish people, 4) conspiracy theories accusing Russian security services of
causing the crash, 5) hate speech about Lech Kaczynski, the Polish President
who died in the crash, and other politicians, and mystical justifications of
the crash, 6) discussions on the future of the Russian-Polish relations, 7)
comparison with previous deaths of Polish presidents connected with Russia
([Bierut](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Boles%C5%82aw_Bierut) [EN] and
[Sikorski](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/W%C5%82adys%C5%82aw_Sikorski) [EN]).

The first wave of information about the tragedy led to copy-pasting and
attempts to find whose fault it was. The topic gathered about 5,200 blog
posts. Even though posts of sorrow and solidarity weren't numerous on the
blogs, Facebook users were much more willing to share their feelings. Facebook
status updates were more personal, usually very short (and written by more
internationalized audience). A Facebook group “[Bring flowers to the Polish
embassy](http://www.facebook.com/group.php?gid=116494505033512&ref=nf)” [RUS]
was set up.

[![Facebook message status by Sergei](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2010/04/serge-300x36.png)](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2010/04/serge.png)

OMG :( Poland :(

[![Facebook message status by Yulia](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2010/04/yulia-300x42.png)](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2010/04/yulia.png)

[![Facebook message status by Yuri](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2010/04/yuri-300x37.png)](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2010/04/yuri.png)

The President of Poland died…

Warsaw-based Aleksander Pryazhnikov posted a picture of people listening to
Prime Minister Tusk's speech at one of Warsaw's shops:

[![Warsowians looking at Premier Tusk's speech, photo by Alexander
P.](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2010/04/supermarket-300x225.jpg)](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2010/04/supermarket.jpg)

Warsawians watching PM Tusk's speech, photo by Alexander Pryazhnikov

Marina Litvinovich was [the first to call Russians to bring
flowers](http://abstract2001.livejournal.com/1098159.html) [RUS] to the Polish
embassy, providing the address of it in Moscow. Later [Veronica
Khokhlova](https://globalvoicesonline.org/author/neeka/) [EN] posted pictures
of the candles and flowers by the fence of the embassy (more pictures are
available [here](http://twitpic.com/photos/smetanka) [EN]):

[![Flowers at the Polish embassy in Moscow, photo by Veronica
Khokhlova](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2010/04/flowers-225x300.jpg)](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2010/04/flowers.jpg)

Flowers at the Polish Embassy in Moscow, photo by Veronica Khokhlova

Sergey Kornienko, a businessman from Kaliningrad region (former Eastern
Prussia, Russia's only region with direct border with Poland), [posted
pictures](http://echo.msk.ru/blog/sergeymuritz/671001-echo/) [RUS] of the
Polish Consulate in Kaliningrad:

[![Flowers at the Kaliningrad consulate, photo by Sergei
Kornienko](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2010/04/kaliningrad-300x200.jpg)](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2010/04/kaliningrad.jpg)

Flowers at the Kaliningrad Consulate, photo by Sergei Kornienko

Those who were mostly focused on the reasons of the crash were either blaming
the President or the pilots. On the other side of the discussion was former
pilot Sergey Verevkin, who [suggested](http://sergey-
verevkin.livejournal.com/42167.html) [RUS] it might have been the error of the
airport equipment. However, the version that it was Kaczynski's fault was more
widespread. Bloggers referred to a similar case in 2008, when Kaczynski [had a
conflict with a
pilot](http://wyborcza.pl/1,76842,5705983,Medal_dla_pilota__co_Lecha_Kaczynskiego_sie_nie_bal.html)
[PL] about landing in Tbilisi during the [South Ossetia
War](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/2008_South_Ossetia_War) [EN].

Besides this interpretation, an ugly, anti-Polish version was widely
transmitted, implying the plane was full of “anti-Russian” politicians and it
was a “higher justice” that the crash happened on the Russian ground. Those
who transmitted this version were bringing to example Kaczynski's decision to
name one of Warsaw streets after [Dzhokhar
Dudayev](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dzhokhar_Dudayev) [EN], a controversial
figure who is considered a national villain in Russia and an independence
leader in Poland, as well as other controversial sayings by Kaczynski and
other right-wing politicians who were on the plane. As _kirpits_
[wrote](http://7freiheit.livejournal.com/375919.html?thread=2991215#t2991215)
[RUS]:

> Этот самолёт был переполнен ненавистью к россиянам и России, он просто не
> мог не упасть – слишком много было камней за пазухой…

This plane was full of hatred towards Russians and Russia, he couldn't but
fall down – there were too many snakes in their bosoms.

_Alexey Melnikov_ , member of the Yabloko party, made [a list of the most
common hate-speech
sayings](http://echo.msk.ru/blog/alex_melnikov_yabloko/671114-echo/) [RUS] on
the topic. He concluded that ten years of Putin's reign has brought to life a
whole generation of people ready to react joyfully to such horrible events.

The other “extreme” view was expressed in a series of posts with conspiracy
theory versions. LJ user _shimerli_
[suggested](http://shimerli.livejournal.com/259674.html) [RUS] there could
have been deliberate misinformation of the pilot. LJ user _esselt_
[questioned](http://esselt.livejournal.com/25946.html) the mainstream media
messages. _Jaga-lux_ tried to [critically analyze](http://jaga-
lux.livejournal.com/218467.html) [RUS] the circumstances of the flight.

Russian liberals were uniform in their solidarity with the Polish people. The
first page of the website [RUS] of [Echo Moskvy](http://echo.msk.ru/) (a
liberal radio station and recently a blogging platform) was filled only with
the reflections on the Polish tragedy. Russian political celebrities and
bloggers wrote their condolences: [Eduard
Limonov](http://echo.msk.ru/blog/limonov/670917-echo/) [RUS], [Vladimir
Soloviev](http://echo.msk.ru/blog/v_soloviev/670911-echo/) [RUS], [Leonid
Radzikhovski](http://echo.msk.ru/blog/radzihovski/671051-echo/) [RUS] and
others. But the most appealing was Matvey Ganapolski's
[address](http://echo.msk.ru/blog/ganapolsky/670899-echo/) (widely cited in
the Polish media):

> я прошу прощения и перед Польшей, как страной. Я понимаю, что лично ничем
> перед ней не провинился, но я россиянин и поэтому чувствую частичку своей
> вины просто потому, что на моей территории погибли граждане его страны.

I apologize to Poland as a country, too. I understand that I'm not guilty as a
person, but I'm a Russian citizen and this is why I feel a bit of personal
guilt just because citizens of [Kaczynski's] country died on my land.

