Pakistan as a developing country has yet to go a long mile before it stands
beside all the developed countries. The women make more than half the
population of the country, but sadly they are not treated well. This year on
March 8th, Pakistan also [celebrated](http://links.org.au/node/1551) “the
women’s day” in an attempt to make a change in their lives showing a ray of
hope to every female. Domestic violence is one the harsh realities of a
Pakistani women. Activists who work for women cause say that many women remain
in violent relationships because they believe they must obey their husbands
and that divorce is a shame.

[![Candle light vigil during the White Ribbon Campaign in Umerkot, Pakistan.
Image by Flickr user CWGL. CC BY ](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2010/04/Pakistan-white-
ribbon-640x480.jpg)](http://www.flickr.com/photos/cwgl/4313632745/)

Candle light vigil during the White Ribbon Campaign in Umerkot, Pakistan.
Image by Flickr user CWGL. CC BY

According to a report of NGO [White Ribbon
Campaign](http://www.whiteribbon.org.pk) (WRC) [Pakistani women are subject to
increasing
abuse](http://www.twocircles.net/2007sep13/pakistani_women_face_increasing_abuse_report.html).
Increased cases of violence are being reported each year in Pakistan.
According to the report: “sexual harassment at the workplace, abuse, beating,
and rape were some of the forms of violence against women.”

One third of women in Pakistan are uneducated and have very little concept
about making their own choices. The police often snub the women and refuse to
register cases unless there are obvious signs of injury and judges at times
seem to sympathize with the husbands.

_Dr. Farzana Bari_ , acting director of the Centre of Excellence in Gender
Studies at Quaid-e-Azam University,
[states](http://criticalppp.org/lubp/archives/7017) that commemorating the day
around the UN theme “Equal rights, equal opportunities: progress for all”
seems to be a fallacy “when rights and opportunities are simply disappearing
from the lives of everyone; men, women and children.”

> Are we then asking for equality in police torture recently shown on
> television channels? Equality in sharing the brutality of the factory-owner,
> who kidnapped, chained and tortured a laborer in Gujranwala? Do we want to
> share the humiliation of bus hostess in Sialkot? Do we want to have equality
> in the fate of Shazia, the young domestic servant who was tortured to death?

Global Voices author _Sana Saleem_ at _the Dawn Blog_
[states](http://blog.dawn.com/2010/03/04/logging-on-to-empower-women/) that:

> For a society to progress, human rights have to be guaranteed, with the
> assurance that rights are maintained without gender bias or discrimination.
> Gender-based violence reflects and reinforces injustices and compromises the
> health, dignity, and liberty of its victims.

In Pakistan [a proposed bill to ban domestic
violence](http://alisonclarke.typepad.com/womens_news/2010/04/pakistan-
domestic-violence-ban.html) is being debated in the parliament. Women rights
activists and some Islamist lawmakers are chasing it. It remains to be seen
who wins. Pakistani blogger _Baaghi_ [questions the efficacy of the
judiciary](http://marvisirmed.com/?p=238) as there is no strong law to protect
the women:

> At the end of the day, dispensation of justice begins from acknowledging an
> act as crime. If domestic violence is not even considered a punishable
> crime, how can one expect to get redress from the system? When acid throwing
> is not listed in the penal code as a form of offence, how one can even hope
> for it to be punishable? And when even some of these crimes against humanity
> are listed as crimes, our rotten system just refuses to acknowledge that it
> ever happened.

Pakistani women can achieve their goal by joining hands together and
motivating each other. Educate women which will ensure awareness of what is
happening to women around the world today is an essential step towards
improving their situation. It is a surprising fact that women are made to do
some of the things simply because of the fact that they are women. No one can
change the world by themselves, but many people doing a little can make a real
difference in the society. The nations that put up with the ill-treatment of
women must know that they are being watched. A good number of governments are
run by men who may not have the wish to transform things unless the world
makes some noise.

The things which we can do at our level are:

  * We can educate ourselves.
  * We can be supportive of organizations that promote women's rights.
  * We can join hands and make our governments know that we are conscious of what's happening around the world and we will not allow it.
  * We can write to foreign embassies about the violence so that they can help us in promoting awareness.
  * We can increase awareness.
  * We can read about it.
  * We can write about it.
  * We can blog about it.
  * We can talk about it.

