These past two weeks were full of sport activities and celebration in
Medellin, Colombia while the city hosted the [IX South American
Games](http://www.medellin2010.org/) (ODESUR) where different Latin American
countries competed for medals in a variety of sports. Locals and visitors
paused their routines to visit the facilities and watch the games. Following
are some of the videos they made, showing how each of them experienced the
games.

Carlos Esteban Orozco had the opportunity to be at the opening ceremony. In
[his four minute video](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=7ogCygI_2hc), we follow
him as he shows up to the ceremony, sits and waits for a few hours until it
begins, highlighting parts of the spectacle and ending with the firework
display that lit the city sky.

Lully was also at the opening ceremonies but [she saw a different
side](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=1AqAnYxScSI) than Carlos Orozco: as she
arrived at the stadium, she saw workers organized in a protest demanding
fairer salaries and decent jobs. She interviewed some of the athletes and then
proceeded to walk to the improvised seating for those who didn't manage to get
inside the venues: sitting outside, watching through the fences. The games,
although meant for everyone, [didn't really benefit the whole
population](http://equinoxio.org/destacado/los-juegos-suramericanos-
medellin-2010-desde-otra-optica-8440/#comment-349342).

A similar experience was lived by Ana Vallejo and Juan David Escobar who tried
to watch the games, but found out that they had to be there 3 hours in advance
to get a seat. So they walked around the new sport facilities and peeped in
through the perforated walls before heading back home. [Here is their
video](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=m1h7thh35LA):

Diana Perez, however, didn't have much trouble getting into the game venues.
Her trick? Getting there early. She managed to get into [several sporting
events](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=0cMXNWI4Rws):

[Lina11co](http://www.youtube.com/user/lina11co) was at the Closing Ceremony,
and [following is the video](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=kXKf8EjQbmg) she
made at the open air ceremony, where you can see the acrobat troupe hanging
from a metallic structure suspended from a crane, many meters above the
audience:

If you wish to watch the
[opening](http://www.livestream.com/telemedellintv/video?clipId=pla_8f5c2920-50f6-4678-8f44-38e322ce6cdf)
and
[closing](http://www.livestream.com/telemedellintv/video?clipId=pla_f9bef67b-945c-4da3-9c6d-e712cf7e83ac)
ceremonies, the complete videos by [regional TV channel
TeleMedellin](http://www.livestream.com/telemedellintv) are online.

Disclosure: Some of the videos on this post were filmed for an episode of
[Todo lo que hay](http://todoloquehay.com/), a webshow in which I am involved.

