[![Traditional_mud_cloth](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2010/03/Traditional_mud_cloth-75x75.jpg)](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2010/03/Traditional_mud_cloth.jpg)Through videos, we see and
learn about the cultural importance and economical boost that working with
fabric is giving some people and organizations in Mali. From a women's group
which claim to have placed Mali as a power in the cloth dying industry, to
artists who have decided to make Bogolanfini or mud dyed cloths their medium,
to the touristic industry that has grown around this art.

First, via
[Craft:](http://blog.craftzine.com/archive/2010/03/bamako_chic_women_cloth.html)
we learned of a recent fundraising activity Maureen Gosling organized to
assist her in finishing her [documentary about the women cloth dyers of
Bamako](http://www.maureengosling.com/bamako/pages/index.html) (Mali's capital
city). In this [video preview](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=u0LEO7o6zAk),
the women dyers speak about the importance their dyed cloth has in Mali and
how working with it has impacted their lives:

Another traditional textile is the mudcloth. This [next video from
TravelWestAfrica](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=axOR_pL4Zq0) shot in Ségou,
we see how they make the dyes which include the mud that gives the cloth its
name:

Another name for the mudcloth is
[Bogolanfini](http://www.adire.clara.net/bogolanintroduction.htm); in [this
following video by hubuf ](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=g7uBrSkcE7A)made in
2006, a trainer explains to a group of students what bogolan is, what it's
made of and what it means for Malian culture:

In this [next video by
claudiodumali](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=BQDFjhF43FE) we can see a group
of visitors learning by doing; with small scraps of cloth they experiment with
the different dyes and muds used in Bogolan making in Ségou:

If you wish to know more about Bogolan, [polbenmali
](http://www.youtube.com/user/Polbenmali)has uploaded a 2 part documentary
([part 1](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=MEgKhncmk5U), [part 2
](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=SXBoU68VJhc)[fr]) on Issiaka Dembele, an
artist who turned to Bogolan as his medium. In the videos, Dembele speaks in
French about his trade, but the images show clearly the intricate and time
consuming process of dying the fabric yellow, covering it in pond mud left to
rot for months which will turn the fabric black, and then going over the
yellow areas to remove the dye in certain parts, painting over other colors in
others:

