In 76 regions of Russia people went to voting stations on March 14 to cast
their votes for local mayors and regional legislature representatives. The
ruling party “United Russia” has won in most of those elections. However, the
victory of the party in power wasn't absolute: in Irkutsk people preferred
opposition candidate Viktor Kondrashov but this was the only case. Despite the
increasing wave of protests (like in
[Irkutsk](http://v-milov.livejournal.com/215513.html) [RUS] itself,
[Kaliningrad](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2010/02/02/russia-anti-
government-protest-covered-by-bloggers-ignored-by-media/), Moscow and others),
“United Russia” managed to keep its dominance in all Russian regional
legislatures as well as city administration offices.

One of the secrets of such “political stability” (besides state-controlled
mass media) is a range of alleged numerous fraud techniques used both by party
members and public officials during the elections. These elections were the
first to show the power of Web 2.0. in uncovering them. Bloggers gathered
evidence of fraud with their cell phone cameras and published them online.

Particularly members of the [election observer association
“Golos”](http://golos.org/?lang=en) [EN] (“A Voice”) were quite active in
promoting election transparency and exposing fraud. The association installed
a fraud hotline website “[88003333350.ru](http://www.88003333350.ru/)” where
everyone could post a fraud report. So far, 561 fraud cases have been noted.

[![Anti-Fraud Hotline, 88003333350.ru](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2010/03/golos-300x95.png)](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2010/03/golos.png)

Anti-Fraud Hotline, 88003333350.ru

**Telephone Voting, Yekaterinburg, Sverdlovsk region**  
Blogger _leonwolf_ [made a
capture](http://leonwolf.livejournal.com/146298.html) of the local TV
programme where a head of the regional election committee was inviting people
to vote by using a phone line and without signing any papers (which is
illegal). “You can just call, tell your passport details and if they match
those in the database your vote will be counted,” the head of election
committee said on TV.

**Protocol Rewriting, Stanitsa Dinskaya, Krasnodar region.**  
Russian oppositional newspaper _Novaya Gazeta_ [posted a
video](http://www.novayagazeta.ru/news/779347.html) [RUS], where an employee
of the local election committee was allegedly rewriting the election protocol
(a document presenting the final result of the election).

**Vote For Relatives, Yekaterinburg**  
In the video below two women confess they were brought to the election station
to vote for their parents (probably unable to get to the election station by
themselves). Such procedure is legal if a person possesses an absentee ballot.
But these two women, as well as the whole bus (can be seen on the background)
of their “colleagues,” do not have it. And still they're allowed to vote. Not
to mention that their transfer was paid by the regional government, as well as
a sightseeing excursion after the election.

**Mass Preliminary Vote, Ivanovo**  
The most popular fraud technique is a directed at a preliminary vote. It's
been practiced among soldiers, policemen and sometimes students. In other
words, regional authorities try to mobilize as many people as they can,
especially if they have channels of pressure. For students such channel of
pressure are various: grades, scholarships, ability to passing an exams, etc.

Blogger _vitaliy-averin_ [posted this video](http://vitaliy-
averin.livejournal.com/73005.html) to illustrate such event:  

This
[video](http://rutube.ru/tracks/3023281.html?v=56d0cb0383d287ad5fba33e5e6f8ce5f)
shows a woman checking the absence of students, while [these
pictures](http://golos.org/a3335.html) depict a huge crowd at the college
hall.

**Ballot Insertion, Astrakhan**  
The video captures two people putting packs of ballots into the ballot box.  

All these cases represent current situation with the Russian electoral system.
The dominance of the ruling party is based on numerous illegal actions that
result in the “expected” election results. At the same time, it shows the
weakness of the political system that fails to conduct its political course
without such anti-democratic and unlawful measures. But as the bloggers become
more and more powerful and as the evidence of the fraud is being more
efficiently distributed among Russian netizens, the government's failure to
provide free and fair elections can become a _real_ , not virtual, problem.

