As [some](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2010/03/11/st-vincent-the-grenadines-
drought/) posts on GV [have shown
](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2010/03/08/barbados-water-response/)recently
[Eng], the Caribbean has been going through a severe drought for the past few
weeks.  
In the French West Indies, bloggers react to this natural disaster which
influences their everyday life and affects even politics.

From January to early June, the French West Indies are in “Carême” – French
for the [Catholic Lent ](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lent)(a period of
fasting and deprivation). The term extends to [a season of the year
](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Guadeloupe#Climate)when the rain level is very
low and the temperatures very high, a time notorious for the chronic lack of
water and extreme dryness of the ground.

In Martinique, _Bondamanjak_ [ announces
](http://www.bondamanjak.com/martinique/28-a-la-une/9124-la-secheresse-
atteint-des-sommets-en-martinique-.html)the peak of “Carême” with poetry [Fr]:

> Le carême a mis son costume de saison blanche et sèche en Martinique.

Lent has put on its costume for a dry and white season in Martinique.

…but doesn't hide the sizzling reality of the temperatures:

> On note du 34°c dans la journée et … 29°C à 19h.

93°F during the day and….84°F at 7 pm have been recorded.

_Bondamanjak_ gives further examples of the disastrous consequences of this
drought on the environment, when he shares an account of the surprise that
Martinicans had this past weekend, when they witnessed a fire near the dome of
the island's volcano, la [Montagne
Pelée](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Montagne_Pel%C3%A9e):

> Les feux de brousailles se multiplient et depuis dimanche les pentes de la
> Montagne Pelée, le plus haut sommet de l'île, sont léchées par des flammmes.
> Les pompiers s'affèrent pour sécuriser les habitations mais ne peuvent rien
> faire pour circonscrire l'incendie. Il faudrait un canadair mais il n'y en a
> pas dans le département.

Bush fires are growing and since Sunday, the sides of the Mount Pelée, the
highest point of the island, have been burning with the flames. Firemen are
busy trying to secure the houses but cannot do anything to contain the fire.
The situation requires the use of a water bomber but there is none on the
island.

This situation has raised serious concerns among the Martinican population,
prompting the Volcano and Earthquake Observatory of Martinique (OVSM) to
release a report on Tuesday, in order to assuage people's worries. It was
republished [here](http://www.montraykreyol.org/spip.php?article3642) by
_Montray Kreyol_ [Fr]:

> Depuis dimanche, un incendie s’est déclaré dans la zone de la coulée de la
> Rivière Claire, sur le flanc sud-ouest de la montagne Pelée. Entre dimanche
> soir et lundi soir, le feu s’est propagé vers les hauteurs jusqu’aux dômes,
> et ce matin, mardi 9 mars, des fumées se dégagent par endroit des zones
> calcinées.
>
> Ce feu et les fumées associées n’ont aucun lien avec une quelconque activité
> volcanique.

Since Sunday, a fire has started in the area of the bed of Rivière Claire, on
the southwestern side of Mount Pelée. From Sunday night to Monday night, the
fire spread towards the top as far as the domes, and this morning, Tuesday
March 9th, smoke is coming up from the burnt-off areas.

