It's a great pleasure for me to announce a joint project between [Global
Voices and BBC
News](http://www.bbc.co.uk/blogs/theeditors/2010/03/superpower_bbc_and_global_voic.html)
as part of the [BBC's SuperPower
season](http://www.bbc.co.uk/blogs/theeditors/2010/03/bbcs_superpower_season.html),
which launches today.

This past year has been particularly eye-opening in terms of the increasing
interplay between mainstream media and citizen journalism. Events in
[Mumbai](https://globalvoicesonline.org/specialcoverage/mumbai-india-
blasts-2008/), [Moldova](https://globalvoicesonline.org/-/world/eastern-
central-europe/moldova/),
[Iran](https://globalvoicesonline.org/specialcoverage/iranian-election-2009/),
[Haiti](https://globalvoicesonline.org/specialcoverage/haiti-
earthquake-2010/), and now [Chile
](https://globalvoicesonline.org/specialcoverage/chile-earthquake-2010/)are
but a few examples in which the world has been eager to make immediate and
direct contact with citizens in crisis in local contexts. These citizens may
have had blogs, Twitter accounts, and cell phones for years, but only in the
last year has the mainstream media adopted the narrative of citizen media as
an integrated element in their news reporting.

When Global Voices was created at Havard University's [Berkman Center for
Internet & Society](http://cyber.law.harvard.edu/) five years ago, the
initiative focused on citizens in developing countries and non-English
speaking societies who were beginning to use blogs to build bridges to people
from different cultures and countries. What could be learned from reading and
translating the words of online dissidents in China? What could be gained by
reading the blogs of Arab women? And how could Global Voices encourage
mainstream media to recognize the value and benefits of sourcing intelligent
and locally admired bloggers in their own reporting?

Over the years, we at Global Voices have become close partners and friends of
organisations such as
[Reuters](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2006/04/14/announcing-our-alliance-
with-reuters/), the BBC, CNN, [La Stampa in
Italy](http://www.lastampa.it/_web/cmstp/tmplRubriche/vociglobali/hrubrica.asp?ID_blog=286),
and many others. At the same time, internet access has increased such that it
has reached a threshold of awareness and participation in most countries
around the world. In countries where just a few years ago the number of blogs
could be counted on one hand, there are now thousands of citizens typing away,
telling their own stories and documenting the world around them. Lives and
communities have changed as a result. In aggregate, the internet has collapsed
many of the working principles of mass media social and political
communications, creating multiple, overlapping platforms for people to speak,
participate, and organize.

At Global Voices, we've continually sought new ways to complement the news
cycle and develop new platforms to highlight how global citizens are
communicating in their own words. We have a virtual, grassroots newsroom made
up of more than 200 [talented and innovative
individuals](https://globalvoicesonline.org/authors/) from countries you
rarely get to hear about in the news.

When I last met with the editor of the BBC News website, [Steve Herman,
](http://www.bbc.co.uk/blogs/theeditors/2010/03/superpower_bbc_and_global_voic.html)in
June 2009, we discussed how we might collaborate on investigating the role and
effects of citizen media throughout the world, with a focus on how local
perspectives can affect global news.

Since then, we've seen mainstream media cover major conflicts such as Iran
substantially through the eyes of citizen content. The idea that citizen
journalism is somehow opposed to or in conflict with traditional journalism is
now clearly past; it's evident that both exist in symbiotic relationship to
one another, with many opportunities to collaborate on the creation of news,
storytelling, and distribution of content.

For two weeks, we will be exploring opportunities to put those collaborations
into practice. Global Voices managing editor Solana Larsen [will be visiting
the BBC newsroom in London](http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/world/8550289.stm).
We'll be adding citizen media links within BBC news stories, while sharing
off-the-radar stories from our own newsroom with BBC editors and reporters.
From the frontlines of online battles of freedom of expression to everyday
stories about language, culture, and daily life in foreign blogs, we look
forward to sharing our best with a broader audience.

_Ivan Sigal is executive director of Global Voices Online._

