Videos record the situation lived these past three days of [city-wide
transportation strike](http://colombiareports.com/colombia-
news/news/8483-bogota-transit-strike-to-expand-tomorrow.html) that has Bogota
paralyzed. Citizens have resorted to walking, riding bicycles, hitchhiking and
climbing into the backs of pickup trucks that will take them closer to their
places of work. The only system that remained in operation yesterday was the
Transmilenio central bus system when even taxi drivers joined the strike, and
it wasn't able to deal with the exponential increase in passengers.

Most of the frustration during the transportation strike has been directed to
the only massive transport system which has been in operation during the
strike: Transmilenio, due to the extremely long lines to get service, the lack
of buses to get from other points in the city to a station and buses that
stopped at stations but were so crammed full of people that no-one could get
in.

This one, recorded by[
pruebasyopublico](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=1RV7HTG-TVQ) shows the view
from the bus as a it rolls into a station:

Inside the stations the situation was also serious. The transmilenio system
which is usually the brunt of complaints due to its maximum capacity being
reached during rush hours, was now at that maximum capacity throughout the
day. [This video](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=bc3oduzKn68) shows the Virrey
station during the strike:

And [this other video](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=RF3q6VzYr8M) (minute
1:40 ) shows the same station without the crowds:

The [following video ](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=vb1hAENPqMs)was made by
someone recording an accident, but at minute 1:40 you can see a yellow
hatchback car that is taking people to work with passengers even sitting on
the floor of the trunk space:

Here is a [mobile upload](http://tweetphoto.com/13023147) by Andrés Hernández
Godoy ([@andresgodoy](http://twitter.com/andresgodoy) on twitter) of a truck
which has already placed a sign on its windshield stating its “routes” in
order to transport people in lieu of buses:

[![Image by Andrés Hernández Godoy](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2010/03/andresgodoy-300x183.jpg)](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2010/03/andresgodoy.JPG)

Image by Andrés Hernández Godoy

Jair Andres Moreno ([@budamoreno](http://twitter.com/budamoreno)) also
uploaded many different photographs regarding the long lines at the
transmilenio stations, sometimes reaching 8 people wide and hundreds of meters
long, like [this
one](http://www.facebook.com/photo.php?pid=11184449&id=587045477), or [this
next one](http://www.facebook.com/photo.php?pid=11184447&id=587045477) where
passengers are crowded on the bus arrival platform, risking their lives.

Transportation complications are not the only effects of the strike: riots,
vandalism and people throwing rocks, sticks and more to buses breaking the
strike, looting of businesses and private residences are what some people have
lived through these past days. It seems that minors were paid between 2.5 USD
and 5 USD by agitators [according to Radio Santa
Fe](http://www.radiosantafe.com/2010/03/03/desordenes-en-suba-agitadores-
pagaron-5-y-10-mil-pesos-a-menores-de-edad/).

In [Violeta Speaks blog, ](http://violetahabla.blogspot.com/2010/03/el-paro-
de-transportes-en-bogota.html) a frequent user of public transportation speaks
about the strike, the bus driver's reasons for the strike and its impact on
the citizens:

> Además, si los señores conductores están exigiendo (hasta donde tengo
> entendido) mejores tarifas, pues nosotros, que somos los que las tenemos que
> pagar, exigimos que nos den un buen trato, porque a parte de todo, muchas
> veces el irrespeto por el pasajero es increíble…

So, if Mr. Busdrivers are demanding (if I understand correctly) better rates,
then we, who are those who have to pay the higher rates, demand that they
treat us well, because if it weren't enough, so many times the disrespect paid
to passengers is incredible.

[El Tiempo newspaper ](http://www.eltiempo.com/movilidad/tercer-dia-de-paro-
de-buses_7334688-1)collected stories from travellers who faced the strike and
its problems: pregnant women affected by tear gases, workers having to walk 4
or 5 hours to get to work, others had to ride their bicycles for more than 2
hours at the middle of the night to get home, a woman who had to resort to
getting into cattle trucks as transport was not only harassed but also had her
cell-phone stolen.

