Fifty years ago, the strongest earthquake ever recorded in history rocked the
city of [Valdivia, Chile](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Valdivia,_Chile). On
May 22, 1960, [the 9.5 magnitude
earthquake](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/1960_Valdivia_earthquake) struck the
epicenter near the city of Cañete. However, Valdivia was the hardest hit
locality with nearly 40% of its building destroyed and leaving close to 20,000
homeless.

Many current users of citizen media are too young to have experienced the 1960
quake, but some like Mauro Barrientos (@maurobarrientos) [talked with someone
who was there fifty years
ago](http://twitter.com/MauroBarrientos/statuses/9749098198):

> Mi awela dijo este terremoto ni se compara al del terremoto de valdivia en
> 1960

My grandmother said that this (2010) earthquake does not compare with the
Valdivia earthquake in 1960

However, the legacy that the earthquake has had on Chile's history was on the
minds of many around the country. Yondaime Andres (@EomerElessar)
[writes](http://twitter.com/EomerElessar/statuses/9751029876):

> a toodos se les aparece el fantasma del 60 por eso el temor

people are afraid because this (earthquake) looks like the ghost of (the
earthquake of 19)60.

From the city of Valdivia, Betsabé Sandoval (@_Nahra) has been [uploading
various vintage photos at Twitpic](http://twitpic.com/photos/_Nahra) of the
destruction from the 1960 earthquake, including this
[photo](http://twitpic.com/15p2xv) of the damage to the Valdivia Cathedral. In
total, she has uploaded 10 different photographs.

[![Photo of Valdivia post-quake uploaded by
_Nahra](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2010/02/v-300x187.jpg)](http://twitpic.com/15p0xj)

Photo of Valdivia post-quake uploaded by _Nahra

There are many Twitter users who currently live in the city of Valdivia.
Throughout the day, they have been reacting to the developments of the 2010
earthquake and how their fellow residents were affected. The Twitter user
@tapeks writes about [the current mood of the
city](http://twitter.com/tapeks/statuses/9750702080):

> Se ve el temor en la gente, todos andan intranquilos y las calles se ven
> desoladas, se ve tan raro #Valdivia

You can see the fear in the people, everyone walks around restless, the
streets are desolate, it looks unusual

With the approach of nightfall on the first night after the earthquake,
[Evelyn Arriagada
(@evelynarriaga)](http://twitter.com/evelynarriagada/statuses/9751531570) and
[Daniela Contreras
(@dcontrerasl)](http://twitter.com/DContrerasL/statuses/9752175580) both
remark how things are a little calmer, but everyone is heading to bed with a
little bit of fear.

Nevertheless, not only is the damage caused by the 1960 earthquake on the
minds of many, but also the reaction by the Chilean people 50 years ago.
Pancho Ballesteros (@Pancho_B)
[writes](http://twitter.com/Pancho_B/statuses/9752442477):

> Si hace 50 años nuestra patria se puso de pie despues de lo de Valdivia, hoy
> es el momento de volver a hacerlo…

If our country got up on our feet after the (earthquake) in Valdivia 50 years
ago, today is the moment to do the same…

