Over the past week we have published a number of posts to present our
conclusions and recommendations to the technology for transparency movement by
focusing on specific categories of projects: [aid
transparency](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2010/05/15/the-aid-transparency-
movement/), [budget
monitoring](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2010/05/17/technology-for-
transparency-review-part-iii/), [election
monitoring](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2010/05/17/technology-for-
transparency-review-part-iii/), [civic
complaints](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2010/05/18/technology-for-
transparency-review-part-iv/), and [parliamentary
informatics](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2010/05/20/technology-for-
transparency-review-part-v/).

Those five categories encompass the vast majority of projects that we
documented throughout our research. However, there are five other categories
of technology for transparency projects that are also worth reviewing from a
thematic perspective.

### Crime Mapping

A number of websites have cropped up over the past few years in the United
States and United Kingdom to add transparency and accessibility to crime
reports from municipal police departments.
[CrimeMapping.com](http://www.crimemapping.com/), [Oakland
Crimespotting](http://oakland.crimespotting.org/),
[CrimeMapper](http://maps.police.uk/), [LAPD Crime
Maps](http://www.lapdcrimemaps.org/),
[CrimeReports](http://www.crimereports.com/),
[SpotCrime](http://www.spotcrime.com/), [Crimedar](http://www.crimedar.com/),
and [EveryBlock](http://www.everyblock.com/) (which began in 2005 as
[ChicagoCrime.org](http://www.chicagocrime.org/)) are just a few such
examples. Outside of the United States and United Kingdom the majority of
crime mapping projects seem to be based in Latin America, which
[claims](http://www.joshuafrens-string.com/2010/05/citizen-security-democracy-
economy.html) 8% of the world's population, 40% of world's homicides, and 66%
of kidnappings.

[WikiCrimes.org](http://www.wikicrimes.org) is a collaborative, global,
multilingual mapping of crimes around the world that is built with [WikiMapps
software](http://wikimapps.com/). It was conceived by [Vasco
Furtado](http://www.wikinova.com.br/vasco), Professor at the University of
Fortaleza, Brazil where he coordinates a research group in “Knowledge
Engineering.” All data can both be imported and exported in the open standard
KML format. WikiCrimes currently has 13,117 reports of crime, almost all of
which are based in Brazil. Reports can be filtered by category, time, and
credibility. Users can sign up for notifications of crime reports based on
their customized filters, and there is a beta mobile application available in
Portuguese. All crime reports are ranked by their number of views, comments,
and confirmations, and are [re-distributed via
Twitter](http://twitter.com/wikicrimes). Users can confirm crime reports by
linking to relevant news items or video and photographic evidence of the
actual crime. So far the most commented crime is a
[homicide](http://www.wikicrimes.org/main.html?idcrime=8BB0E3FEBCFFADD2E2DF535EE2B7D223)
that took place on March 29, 2008 at 11 in the evening in Sao Paulo. It has
received 22 positive confirmations, one negative confirmation, and four
comments.

![wikicrimes.org](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2010/05/Screen-shot-2010-05-21-at-4.39.PM_.jpg)

[Delitos Ecuador](http://www.delitosecuador.com/) is a project of
[Fundapi](http://www.fundapi.orgu) which uses
[Ushahidi](https://transparency.globalvoicesonline.org/tools/ushahidi) to
collect and aggregate crime reports in Ecuador. Reports can also be submitted
via Twitter using the hashtag
[#delitosEC](http://twitter.com/#search?q=%23delitosEC). The Illegal Drug
Trade Map in Argentina combines a [blog with a Google
map](http://mapadelnarcotrafico.blogspot.com/). It was created by the
Argentinian Association Against Drugs and enables citizens to learn more about
the illegal drug trade in Argentina, and to submit locations where they have
seen drug dealing take place. [Panamá
Transparente](https://transparency.globalvoicesonline.org/listing/panamá-
transparente) uses Ushahidi to aggregate and map reports about crime in
Panama. [Iluminemos Mexico](http://www.iluminemosmexico.org.mx/) is a citizen
network against violence in Mexico that maps crimes and invites users to
discuss and implement solutions to internal security problems. Outside of
Latin America,
[Sithi](https://transparency.globalvoicesonline.org/project/sithi) is a
Cambodian human rights portal that aims to crowdsource and curate reports of
human rights violations across multiple human rights organizations.

**Recommendations:**

While most crime mapping websites in the United States visualize official
crime data from municipal police departments, which can then be confirmed and
commented on by users, all of the crime mapping projects we documented depend
on individual citizens to provide the information. This is likely due to the
fact that police departments in most of the world still do not publish their
crime reports, much less in a structured format that can be automatically
mapped and re-purposed. We recommend to crime mapping project coordinators
that they work in collaboration with local police departments in order to
automate the publishing of official crime data. If a project has successfully
convinced a police department to publish its crime reports, we suggest that
they publish their experience to help provide like-minded projects with an
advocacy strategy.

While mapping crime helps us better understand both where it occurs and how
crime spreads over time, it does not necessarily lead toward pro-active
solutions. In fact, it can even lead to paranoia and social exclusion if
residents react by merely investing in higher walls and more expensive alarm
systems. Crime mapping platforms should focus on prevention as much as after-
the-fact reporting. We recommend that they integrate their content with social
groups that are working in neighborhoods where crime is prevalent and youth
are at risk.

We believe that crime mapping platforms should collaborate with local
bloggers, journalists, and activists to host monthly discussions about how to
deal with a crime problem that has been particularly troublesome over the past
four weeks. We suggest that it is useful to think of crime through the lens of
[epidemiology](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Epidemiology), with a focus on
curing the disease.

### Extractive Industries

[The Deepwater Horizon oil
spill](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Deepwater_Horizon_oil_spill)
[illustrates](http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/world/us_and_canada/10134881.stm) and
justifies the public's interest in the activities of extractive industries.
The [Extractive Industry Transparency Initiative](http://eiti.org/) aims to
bring about greater disclosure of payments from companies to governments,
contracts and information on how revenues are spent by the oil, mining, and
gas sectors. We believe that the movement for greater extractive industry
transparency would benefit from the use of technology to bring about greater
awareness of the activities of the extractive industries, but so far we have
been able to find few examples of existing projects.

[Publish What You Pay](http://www.publishwhatyoupay.org/en/activities) is a
global civil society coalition that helps citizens of resource-rich developing
countries hold their governments accountable for the management of revenues
from the oil, gas and mining industries. It has supported a number of
[capacity building workshops
worldwide](http://www.publishwhatyoupay.org/en/activities). [Landman Report
Card](http://www.landmanreportcard.com/) is a project of the [ExtrAct group at
MIT](http://civic.mit.edu/projects/c4fcm/extract) which aims to [provide
information](http://civic.mit.edu/news/bringing-the-power-of-information-to-
the-people) and tools to residents whose land is coveted by oil and gas
companies. While its focus is almost entirely on the United States, the
platform and resources can also be used by residents worldwide.

[Nomad Green](http://en.nomadgreen.org) is a multilingual platform for
Mongolian environmental citizen journalists to document environmental threats
and climate change in their country. Much of their reporting and documentation
has focused on the environmental and social impact of [open-pit
mining](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Open-pit_mining). They use [SeeClickFix
to map examples of harmful and illegal mining](http://en.nomadgreen.org/map/),
and to encourage direct action. The [Observatory of Mining Conflicts in Latin
America](http://www.olca.cl/ocmal/) has a rudimentary map which links to
information about mining-related community conflicts that have taken place
throughout Latin America. So far it links to information about 136 different
conflicts.

**Recommendations:**

We recommend that [Publish What You Pay](http://www.publishwhatyoupay.org/),
[Revenue Watch Institute](http://www.revenuewatch.org/our-work/projects), and
the [Extractive Industry Transparency Initiative](http://eiti.org/) all attend
and host barcamps that invite technologists and bloggers to strategically
discuss how online tools can be used to bring about more transparency in the
extractive industries – both in terms of environmental/social impact and also
financial corruption. The [World Wildlife Federation's Amazon
Map](http://www.worldwildlife.org/what/wherewework/amazon/interactivemap.html)
and the [Louisiana Bucket Brigade Oil Spill Crisis
Map](http://oilspill.labucketbrigade.org/) are two models for mapping impact,
whereas [Sourcemap](http://www.sourcemap.org/) illustrates a potential
platform to map the flow of money related to extractive industries.

### Local Government

In our [podcast interview](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2010/02/09/podcast-
interview-with-fabiano-angelico-of-transparncia-brasil/), Fabiano Angelico
observed that while most technology for transparency projects focus on federal
government transparency, their potential for impact is in fact much stronger
at the local level where users are likely to be more invested in policy
decisions that directly affect their daily lives. Compared to national level
projects we were able to find relatively few technology for transparency
projects at the local level, however it is also likely that there is less
awareness and available information about those projects.

[Local Accountability Portals in
Atitlan](https://transparency.globalvoicesonline.org/listing/local-
accountability-portals-atitlan) provides easy-to-use and cheap tools to help
local municipalities of four different villages in the department of Sololá to
[publish all the information](http://comude.lagungt.org/) required by law on
their local government websites. [Concejo Visible
Bucaramanga](https://transparency.globalvoicesonline.org/listing/consejo-
visible) is an initiative coordinated by Universidad Industrial de Santander
in Colombia to make more transparent the activities of the Bucaramanga
Municipal Council Administration. It also opened a collaborative space to
share ideas and discuss policies that matter to them. Concejo Visible
Bucaramanga is, in fact, one of a number of similar citizen-led transparency
initiatives that make up the Colombian [Network of Citizen
Observers](http://www.redobservatoriosconcejo.org/).

[Adote um Vereador](https://transparency.globalvoicesonline.org/project/adote-
um-vereador) encourages Brazilian citizens to blog about the work of their
local elected officials in order to hold them accountable. Fabiano Angelico,
our research reviewer who is also based in Sao Paulo, [ suggests
](https://transparency.globalvoicesonline.org/project/adote-um-
vereador#comment-24) that participating bloggers should pick a monthly topic
and try to raise awareness and advocate for more government data related to
that one topic. It is worth noting that a similar “adopt a politician”
campaign began in Peru in 2008 when the well known journalist Rosa María
Palacios [asked](http://peru21.pe/impresa/noticia/tenemos-derecho-
saberlo/2008-09-06/223853) citizens to mount pressure in order to get
information about the operational expenses of national congressmen. Juan
Arellano wrote an[ in-depth review of the
project](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2008/10/03/peru-bloggers-adopting-
congressional-representatives/), which is no longer active following the
overwhelming resistance by most congressmen.

**Recommendations:**

We recommend to all developers and coordinators of local technology for
transparency projects that they read Georg Neumann's post “[Developing Hyper-
Local Integrity Systems to fight and prevent
corruption](http://socialtransparency.wordpress.com/2010/03/11/developing-
hyper-local-integrity-systems-to-fight-and-prevent-corruption/)“, which
encourages such projects to use the [National Integrity System
Assessment](http://go2.wordpress.com/?id=725X1342&site=socialtransparency.wordpress.com&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.transparency.org%2Fpolicy_research%2Fnis&sref=http%3A%2F%2Fsocialtransparency.wordpress.com%2F2010%2F03%2F11%2Fdeveloping-
hyper-local-integrity-systems-to-fight-and-prevent-corruption%2F) as a
holistic framework to analyze both the extent and causes of corruption in a
given country.

We also support and encourage the replication of “adopt a politician” projects
in all municipalities worldwide to create more awareness and accountability at
the local level.

### Private Sector:

We specifically set out to document projects that aim to increase government
transparency and political accountability, but throughout the course of our
research it became clear that several private sector transparency projects are
explicitly in the public's interest, including those related to consumer
rights and the environmental/social impact of corporate behavior.

[Quien Paga Manda](http://www.quienpagamanda.com/) (“Who Pays is in Charge”)
is a Costa Rican blog by former journalist (and Technology for Transparency
Network advisor) Hazel Feigenblatt. It serves as an information resource about
the responsiveness of businesses to customers who have received poor service.
It is also meant to amplify the voices of citizens who otherwise have no
recourse to hold private businesses accountable. Issues are categorized by
electronics, banks, restaurants, public services, and vehicles.
[Reclamos.cl](http://www.reclamos.cl/) is a similar consumers’ rights platform
based in Chile, which has a strong focus on working with broadcast media to
distribute and amplify stories about companies that are unresponsive to
consumer complaints. So far they have managed to facilitate 1,869 mainstream
media stories, which are broken down by media outlet on their [front
page](http://www.reclamos.cl/). In addition to filing complaints, users can
also list recommendations for positive service experiences. A [business
directory](http://www.reclamos.cl/directorio_de_empresas) lists complaints by
business, and select complaints are featured on the “emphasized complaints”
page. Every complaint lists the number of comments it has received and the
number of times it has been read.

[Sourcemap](http://www.sourcemap.org/) is an open source, global platform for
researching, optimizing and sharing the supply chains behind a number of
everyday products. “We believe that people have the right to know where things
come from and what they are made of,” declares the website. Sample sourcemaps
include a [Giant TCR '04 Bicycle](http://www.sourcemap.org/object/giant-
tcr-04-bicycle), [iPod](http://www.sourcemap.org/object/ipod-production),
[Tesla Roadster](http://www.sourcemap.org/object/tesla-roadster), and [IKEA
Sultan Alsarp bed](http://www.sourcemap.org/object/ikea-sultan-alsarp-bed).
Sourcemaps are organized by user-submitted tags, and also by “most favorited”,
“most commented”, and “most complex”.

[CorpWatch](http://www.corpwatch.org/) is a San Francisco-based aggregator and
platform of articles, blog posts, investigative reports, statistics, and
multimedia related to the corporate accountability worldwide. It categorizes
its content by
[industry](http://www.corpwatch.org/article.php?list=type&type=203) and
[issue](http://www.corpwatch.org/article.php?list=type&type=166).

**Recommendations:**

In most developing countries the past two decades have seen the privatization
of many industries that were once run by the government. As privatization
continues, citizens must develop new tools to hold those new private
corporations accountable. Archon Fung rightly [points
out](http://www.nextgov.com/nextgov/ng_20090903_7217.php) that the
transparency movement should focus on private companies at least as much as
government agencies. We recommend to all technology for transparency activists
that they invest more of their time on projects that hold corporations
accountable.

All of the above-mentioned projects publish content related to multinational
corporations. Most of them categorize that content per corporation to create
site-wide business directories. But we do not yet have an aggregator of all of
this related content across multiple platforms to provide a more comprehensive
look at the responsiveness, behavior, and social/environmental impact of major
corporations. We recommend that private sector transparency projects convene a
conference to agree on semantic standards that can easily be aggregated and
re-purposed across their platforms.

As one of the ultimate goals of such projects is to improve the behavior and
responsiveness of corporations, we recommend that private sector transparency
projects partner with business schools to systematically study what advocacy
strategies are most effective in convincing corporations to voluntarily become
more accountable. For example, is it possible to organize a competition on
[Sourcemap](http://www.sourcemap.org/) where major clothing companies
voluntarily submit the supply chains of their products to compete for the
lowest carbon footprint?

### Advocacy:

Admittedly, the most nebulous category of projects on the Technology for
Transparency Network is “advocacy.” At worst it can be seen as something of a
miscellaneous dumping ground of all projects that don't belong elsewhere. On
the other hand, advocacy projects can also be seen as the glue which holds
together all of the above-mentioned categories, and tries to fill the gaps in
the transparency and accountability ecosystem. Unless awareness is spread in
government, the media, and civil society about the need for such projects,
they will never scale up to a level where their impact can be measured over
time.

[More information more Rights [Más Información Más
Derechos]](https://transparency.globalvoicesonline.org/listing/more-
information-more-rights-más-información-más-derechos) promotes public debate
on access to public information in Colombia. In addition to its blog, it also
promotes discussion and distributes information via
[Twitter](http://twitter.com/mas_info),
[Facebook](http://www.facebook.com/pages/Mas-Informacion-Mas-
Derechos/142709506085),
[Slideshare](http://www.slideshare.net/masinformacionmasderechos), and
[Scribd](http://www.scribd.com/masinformacionmasderechos).
[Képmutatás](https://transparency.globalvoicesonline.org/project/képmutatás),
which means “hypocrisy” in Hungarian, advocates for more transparency in
campaign financing in Hungary by estimating the unreleased expenses made by
political parties during election campaigns and distributing their findings
through traditional and social media.
[Kubatana.net](https://transparency.globalvoicesonline.org/project/kubatananet)
has built a network of over 200 civil society organizations in Zimbabwe, an
archive of over 15,800 documents, and an SMS subscriber list of over 9,000
individuals. It promotes collective action, such as a campaign to determine
how toll booth revenue is being used by the government.
[Saatsaam](https://transparency.globalvoicesonline.org/listing/saatsaam),
which means ‘clean’ in Khmer, aims to encourage public participation in
promoting transparency by raising awareness about the impact of corruption,
and making related documents freely available.
[ProAcceso](https://transparency.globalvoicesonline.org/project/proacceso),
founded by Mercedes de Freitas of the Venezuelan chapter of Transparency
International, is a coalition of organizations in Venezuela that advocate for
timely, relevant government data related to public health, education,
politics, law enforcement, the use of public resources, and salaries of public
officials.

**Recommendations:**

Most advocacy projects we documented target either governments or the general
public in their efforts to increase awareness about the importance of
transparency and accountability, and the role that open data plays in bringing
about both. We recognize that each audience is distinct and requires different
strategies.

For groups advocating to governments, we recommend that they frame their
advocacy in terms of cooperation rather than hostility. Transparency and
accountability should be framed as pathways toward political credibility. We
specifically recommend that advocacy groups seek out like-minded supporters
who work in high government positions and depend on them to help promote and
amplify the importance of transparent governance and open data from within.

For groups advocating to the general public, we recommend that they work
closely with both mainstream and social media. The [World
Bank](http://web.worldbank.org/WBSITE/EXTERNAL/WBI/EXTWBIGOVANTCOR/0,,menuPK:1740542~pagePK:64168427~piPK:64168435~theSitePK:1740530,00.html)
and [Transparency International](http://www.transparency.org/) have published
a number of guides and white papers on how to design effective anti-corruption
campaigns. _[People, Spaces,
Deliberation](http://blogs.worldbank.org/publicsphere/)_ , a blog of the World
Bank's CommGAP initiative, also frequently publishes recommendations and case
studies related to advocacy campaigns for transparency and accountability.

As much as possible, avoid acronyms and unnecessarily technical language.
Creativity always helps draw attention to your cause. For example, [Fifth
Pillar](http://www.5thpillar.org/), an NGO headquartered in Chennai, India,
printed “[Zero Ruppees](http://zerocurrency.org/)” bills with the image of
Ghandi to be given to any official asking for a bribe. The initiative was
covered by [CNN](http://www.cnngo.com/mumbai/none/zero-rupee-833044), the
[Economist](http://www.economist.com/world/asia/displaystory.cfm?story_id=15393714),
the
[Telegraph](http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/worldnews/asia/india/7137567/India-
issues-zero-rupee-banknotes.html), [Boing
Boing](http://boingboing.net/2010/02/05/zero-rupee-note-that.html), and many
other international media outlets. Fifth Pillar received calls from interested
groups in Nepal, Argentina, Mexico, France and Germany who wanted to implement
their own zero currency projects.

The Zero Rupees initiative was a creative response to spread awareness about
the problem of bribery in India. Similar creativity should be applied to
initiatives and campaigns that advocate for open government data.

### Conclusion:

With this post we conclude the first phase of our research into the role of
technology in the transparency and accountability movement. Our
[platform](https://transparency.globalvoicesonline.org/), however, remains
open to new submissions of relevant, innovative projects, and we anticipate a
second phase of research with a greater focus on evaluation for impact.

One of the most difficult challenges throughout our research was simply
developing a taxonomy to categorize and describe the projects we documented.
We recognize that technology for transparency projects might choose to
describe themselves and their objectives in language that differs from
traditional anti-corruption organizations and the donors that fund them. We
believe that categories on the website will always be dynamic and will shift
as new projects come online and maturing projects evolve their objectives and
strategies.

Over the next few days all of our research will be bundled into a single PDF
document for the sake of cohesiveness and distribution. However, we emphasize
that the distribution of reports is not as significant as the distribution of
new ideas that turn into concrete projects and partnerships. As such, the
objective of the Technology for Transparency Network will always be to
facilitate the sharing and learning of skills and strategies across projects,
sectors, and communities. We aim to translate our findings into as many
languages as possible. (Already our findings have been translated into
[Portuguese](https://pt.globalvoicesonline.org/?p=7612),
[French](https://fr.globalvoicesonline.org/?p=34542),
[Chinese](https://zh.globalvoicesonline.org/hant/2010/03/09/5810/),
[Spanish](https://es.globalvoicesonline.org/2010/03/25/comentario-sobre-
tecnologia-para-la-transparencia-parte-i/), and
[Bahasa](https://id.globalvoicesonline.org/2010/03/24/tinjauan-proyek-
technology-for-transparency/).) In the future we hope to host live chats with
developers, bloggers, and activists focused on similar works of engagement in
order to spread the best ideas and come up with new ones.

We will especially re-distribute our findings, conclusions, and
recommendations to all groups and projects that have been mentioned throughout
our research. And we will work with like-minded research and mapping projects
including [ParticipateDB](http://participatedb.com/),
[Participedia](http://www.participedia.net/wiki/Welcome_to_Participedia), the
[International Association for Public Participation](http://www.iap2.org/),
the [National Coalition for Dialogue &
Deliberation](http://www.thataway.org/),
[ePractice](http://www.epractice.eu/), [MobileActive's
mDirectory](http://mobileactive.org/areaofpractice/Democratic+Participation),
and [LocalLabs](http://forums.e-democracy.org/groups/locallabs) to ensure that
our work is cross-linked and cross-verified.

We encourage interaction, new ideas, and challenges to everything we have
published. Please do get involved to help push the discourse and the movement
forward.

