The Spanish citizen journalism site [_Bottup_](http://www.bottup.com/) is
accepting entries to the [II Citizen Journalist
Award](http://www.bottup.com/periodistaciudadano/ii-citizen-journalist-awards)
until March 15. The winner will be named a “Special Correspondent” of Bottup
and will be awarded free travel to any destination from where they would like
to report (max 1,800 Euros).

Editor of [Global Voices in Spanish](https://es.globalvoicesonline.org), [Juan
Arellano](https://globalvoicesonline.org/author/juan-arellano/) from Peru,
will be joining the jury that selects the winner.

Spanish-speakers from any country can participate. You simply have to register
as a citizen journalist with Bottup and submit a news story in any format
(text, video, images, etc).

The Bottup Newsroom will edit the story if necessary (“contrasting,
verification, correction and widening”) and publish it. All news stories
published on Bottup before March 15, 2010, will automatically be entered in
the competition.

You can consult the [complete documentation
here](http://www.bottup.com/periodistaciudadano/bases/) (in Spanish).

> Want to report a grave injustice? Or write a review of the last movie you
> saw? … The purpose of the Citizen Journalist Awards is to promote a new
> model of information-from the ground up, produced by citizens and worked on
> by professional journalists.

In the [first
edition](http://www.bottup.com/periodistaciudadano/IPPC/index.html) [ES] of
the Bottup citizen journalism award in 2008, [there were three
winners](http://www.bottup.com/200806193485/Medios/el-primer-premio-
periodista-ciudadano-ya-tiene-ganadores.html) [ES] in different categories,
selected from 214 participating news stories.

The winners were Ágata Mata Bermúdez from Málaga who won with the article
_“[La Iglesia: comunión y
celíacos](http://www.bottup.com/200805043122/Denuncia/la-iglesia-comuni-
celos.html)“_. Another winner, was the story _“[Adoptar millones de
sonrisas](http://www.bottup.com/200806133432/Ciudadania/adoptar-millones-de-
sonrisas.html)“_ by Eduardo Marin Raboso. Finally, Olga Pardo Ayuso won for
the story _“[Alimentar a los coches o alimentar a las
personas](http://www.bottup.com/200805283302/Cambio-Climatico/alimentar-a-los-
coches-o-alimentar-a-las-personas.html)“_.

