[![Protect.Your.Education.Illustration](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2010/03/march4th.jpg)The March 4 National Day of Action to
Defend Education](http://defendcapubliceducation.wordpress.com/) is underway
at several United States universities. Students are protesting against tuition
fee hikes and racism, and for free publicly-funded education.

The focus of activity is in California where a statewide protest is underway
from UC Berkeley to Oakland campuses. Participants are encouraged to use any
tactics they deem effective or appropriate. This includes strikes, walkouts,
marches, rallies, occupations, sit-ins or teach-ins. The rallying cry is
public outrage at recent increases in tuition rates—up to 32%—at state public
universities in California.

On Twitter, the [#March4
](http://search.twitter.com/search?q=%23march4)hashtag is being used by people
with updates about events.
[@Lavika](http://twitter.com/lavika/status/9911683741) shared information
regarding the participation of California State Superintendent [Jack
O’Connel](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Jack_O%27Connell) at a rally scheduled
at Colton Hall in Monterey. Colton Hall is a symbolic building since it was
the site of the first publicly funded school in California.

The website [Fightback! News](http://www.fightbacknews.org/2010/3/2/education-
struggle-heats) has an article about mounting restlessness in different
California college campuses. The UC Irvine Campus Administration Building was
occupied by students and workers on February 24. One of their demands included
financial aid for undocumented students.

Race relations is another issue which is boiling to the surface as part of the
March 4 event. The UC San Diego and Berkeley Black Student Unions and the
[UCLA Afrikan Student Union](http://www.blackbruins.org/) have engaged in
demonstrations against hate crimes and the lack of diversity in the UC System.
A recent Blackout was held at UC Berkeley campus on March 1st.

The following Youtube video uploaded by
[rgiwaproductions](http://www.youtube.com/user/rgiwaproductions
"rgiwaproduction's youtube profile") highlights some of the demonstration
activities.

  
Blackout Demonstration at UC Berkeley on March 1st 2010

There is East Coast participation from Hunter College, New York University and
The State University of New York (SUNY), and The New School where many
students have announced their solidarity in blogs and social networking sites.
The state of New York saw a 14% hike in tuition rates last fall. On one blog,
[_Takethecity_](http://takethecity.wordpress.com/about/), there is a manifesto
of sorts, saying they have had enough of paying for, “a ‘crisis’ created by
the rich and the bureaucrats that serve them.”

[_Occupy Boston_](http://occupyboston.wordpress.com/) writes that
Massachusetts has seen their share of public education budget cuts also, and
about a US$400 hike in fees per semester. They are organizing a teach-in from
4 p.m. to 7 p.m. where they will address issues such as public education
funding in Massachusetts, democracy in the educational system, accessibility
and affordability of public education in MA.

The March 4 Day National Day of Action stems from a [meeting held on October
24, 2009](http://defendcapubliceducation.wordpress.com/2009/12/05/12/) at the
UC Berkeley Campus where teachers, students, parents, organizations, unions
and anyone interested in education were invited to participate in an open
dialogue to discuss the increases in public education costs. More than 800
people attended the meeting, their main concern being that tuition increases
will negatively affect working class students and communities of color. They
expressed solidarity with demonstrations and people united against the tuition
rate increases, and democratically decided on the March 4 Day of Action.

About a month later, UC Berkeley students occupied Wheeler Hall, a main
lecture hall, and made demands for a free public education. A YouTube video
uploaded by
[OccupyEverything2009](http://www.youtube.com/user/OccupyEverything2009
"Berkeley students occupy Wheeler Hall") follows the students through their
direct action efforts.

Other signs of solidarity include the dropping of pro-March 4 banners across
college campuses in the U.S. The [New School Reoccupied
Blog](http://reoccupied.wordpress.com/) has posted several photographs of
banners dropped in the California area and the U.S. that depict language
supporting the March 4 event.

