February is a very special month in the Dominican Republic. Not only does the
country celebrate its [National Independence
Day](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dominican_Republic#Independence) on February
27, but there are also Carnival festivities and the beginning of Lent which
often falls during this time. They are two very different events that seem to
clash with the Catholic Church's vision. In fact, for years it has insisted on
separating these celebrations. This convergence of events can demonstrate the
two sides of a people that are profoundly religious, but at the same time,
also like to party. Blogger Rossy Díaz [writes how the topic seems to come up
at the same time each year [es]](http://rossydiaz.wordpress.com/2010/02/04/si-
al-carnaval-en-serio):

> Es ya conocida la campaña puntual de la comisión asesora permanente para la
> separación del carnaval de las fechas patrias y la cuaresma, en relación a
> la conveniencia de movilizar las celebraciones del carnaval(…) Nuestro
> carnaval, históricamente, se ha crecido con las muestras de patriotismo, con
> cada expresión viva de nuestra sociedad, con la fe, y seguirá creciendo en
> esencia, ante las penas y las alegrías de este Caribe que nos une.

This permanent campaign from the standing Advisory Commission for the
Separation of National Anniversaries from Carnival and Lent, especially in
relation to the desire to change the date of Carnival celebrations, is already
well known (…) Our Carnival, historically, has grown with demonstrations of
patriotism, with every living expression of our society and faith, and it will
continue to grow in essence, along with the joys and sorrows of the Caribbean
that unites us.

Jonathan, a reader of the blog [_En Segundos
[es]_](http://www.ensegundos.net/2010/02/iglesia-catolica-califica-de-
irrespeto-celebrar-el-carnaval-en-tiempo-de-cuaresma/), agrees that the dates
should be separate:

> Claro que es una locura… CARNAVAL significa Festival de la CARNE, y cuaresma
> es abstinecia de todo lo que supone “Carne”, sobre todo en el sentido
> espiritual, pero claro…. ESTA ES LA ISLA ALREVES!!!!!!

Of course it is crazy… CARNIVAL means the festival of the FLESH, and Lent is
abstienance from everything that is “carnal,” above all in a spiritual sense,
but of course… (the Dominican Republic) is the island of opposites!!!

The Dominican carnival is a centuries-old tradition that goes back to colonial
times, with records going back to the year 1520. With a mixture of European
and African heritages, the result is a diversity of characters that include
the [Cojuelo Devils of La
Vega](http://www.flickr.com/photos/vegano/4299622364/), [Papeluses of
Cotuí](http://www.flickr.com/photos/pedritoguzman/152173041/), the [Santiago
piglets](http://www.flickr.com/photos/nisti2/4288253979/), the Macaraos of
Salcedo, [Guloyas of San Pedro de
Macorís](http://www.flickr.com/photos/46034543@N00/3671497900/),
[Robalagallina](http://www.flickr.com/photos/marianohdez/2806194403/),
[Califé](http://www.flickr.com/photos/marianohdez/2801261450/), and other
popular cultural expressions.

[![Cojuelos Devils. Photo by kptyson and used under a Creative Commons
license.](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2010/02/2707805899_6ba2826da8.jpg)](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2010/02/2707805899_6ba2826da8.jpg)

Cojuelos Devils. Photo by kptyson and used under a Creative Commons license.

Carnival groups, parades, and tours to the interior of the country all make up
part of the Carnival festivities. On a provincial level, the Carnival of La
Vega is probably the most well-known on a global level with the draw of the
“vejigazos” (beatings) of the Cojuelo Devils. The tradition is that the
costumed devils carry small bags made of animal hide and give “vejigazos”
(beatings) to passers-by. The accompanying pain is described by blogger
[Yaniris López [es]](http://yalodominicana.blogspot.com/2010/02/la-vega-por-
carnaval.html) who writes about the essence of Carnival in La Vega:

> Un sonido seco seguido de un dolor intenso que hace que te hierva la sangre
> se escucha cerquita. La rabia se apodera de ti. Un segundo golpe te deja sin
> fuerzas, seguido de una palabrota amortiguada por el dolor, un dolor tan
> fuerte que te priva, es decir, no te deja siquiera reaccionar, correr, pedir
> auxilio…
>
> Y a medida que la sangre y los músculos asimilan el golpe llega la risa, una
> risa rencorosa que te recuerda que nadie te obligó a lanzarte a las calles y
> exponerte a los vejigazos de los diablos del carnaval de La Vega…

A nearby dull thud is followed by an intense pain that makes one's blood boil.
Anger seizes you. A second blow leaves you weak, followed by a muffled curse
because of the pain, a pain so strong that it deprives you, in other words, it
does not allow you to react, run, ask for help…

As one's blood and muscles absorb the pain, comes laughter, a spiteful
laughter that reminds you that no one forced you to head for the streets and
expose yourself to the “beatings” of the Carnival devils of La Vega.

Carnival celebrations culminate with a large parade that takes place in early
March along the
[Malecón](http://www.flickr.com/photos/8230500@N04/1128463566/) in Santo
Domingo with the participation of almost all of its characters. The parade
takes place usually to the beat of “[Baila la
Calle](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=VdTbu64YQCo )” (Street Dance), a song
immortalized by the composer [Luis Días, who died in late
2009](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2009/12/14/dominican-republic-goodbye-to-
composer-luis-terror-dias/) and to whom this year's Carnival is dedicated.

In contrast to the festive atmosphere of Carnival, once the celebrations end
comes the typical recovery days of Lent, which culminates in the celebration
of Easter. While the traditions of attending Church, reflection, not eating
meat, processions, [the burning of
Judas](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Burning_of_Judas), and other related
events, Easter in recent years has become an excuse to take a mini-vacation.
At that time, Dominican beach resorts become crowded by those looking to
escape the routine. Even though the Church has complained, hoteliers do not
complain.

Translated by Eduardo Ávila

