[![Santiago After the Earthquake by pviojo CC-
By](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2010/02/4392683046_f3b2396130.jpg)](http://www.flickr.com/photos/pviojoenchile/4392683046/)

Santiago After the Earthquake by pviojo CC-By

As the day comes to a close, more videos crop up of the devastating [8.8
magnitude earthquake that hit Chile at 3:30
am](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2010/02/27/chile-powerful-8-8-magnitude-
earthquake-strikes-country/). The earthquake, which not only affected the
mainland through the ground movements, also generated tsunami waves that set
out an alarm throughout the Pacific as different nations prepared for the
waves to hit their shores.

Some videos were made during the earthquake itself, as this amateur video
found on YouTube. It starts with a shot of a computer in a room, and as the
earth moves the rumble of the earth can be heard, then the lights go out and
we are left in the dark, hearing only the voices of a woman and a man we
assume to be the one holding the camera trying to calm her down.

(Video has since been removed from YouTube due to a Copyright claim made by
Jonathan Munizaga)

This next one was recorded by YouTube user ikonsento during [one of the
aftershocks](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=fWrXlQJwLO8):

[Ikonsento has been reporting](http://www.youtube.com/user/ilkonsento) since
minutes after the first earthquake, when he uploaded this video showing how
his house fared: the way furniture slid on the floor and toppled over bearing
witness to the earthquake's strength:

This video was made minutes after the quake, as [this next
one](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=VNJ2RMWt5Cg) where two men who had just
arrived in Chile experience the quake and then decide to leave their building
and stand outside for a bit. As lights come back on their building, they walk
back and the building's inhabitants are all milling in the lobby, and as they
return to the building, the assess the damage: broken water pipes and cracked
concrete.

As daylight came, more people went out to the streets and recorded the damage
they observed:  
[  
Netprox ](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=dTFZyQ3zIcI)drove through the
highway, and had to squeeze under a fallen bridge to get through.

Rafael Vial also went out to the streets and recorded a collapsed bridge in
Llaillay, Chile, which he streamed through his [mobile phone on Qik.
](http://qik.com/video/5176730)

Communications in many areas of Chile are down and it gets harder to get in
touch with loved ones to make sure they are all right. [This couple of girls
](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=sy4xokxN_6s)took advantage of YouTube and
recorded their video, where they tell friends and family they are OK, and
narrate a bit of what they've seen and heard regarding the earthquake:

And others, in their need to help are spreading valuable information regarding
what to do to maximize the possibility of staying alive in a collapsed
building. Such is the case with this video which is being passed after the
quake. The Life Triangle theory basically states that the safest place to hide
in an earthquake is not under furniture, but besides a strong piece of
furniture: that way, if the piece of furniture is crushed by falling
materials, it will not collapse on the person hiding under it. Instead, the
person will be safe in the pocket created on the object's side. This
[promotional video ](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Cvx-Em5kuJ0) which was
[adapted and translated into
Spanish](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=T0P0Z0HDAlY), explains why hiding
under desks or under doorways is just not going to allow you to survive.

