[![photo by Mario Carvajal CC-by](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2010/02/4252172264_f3e3aeac26.jpg)](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2010/02/4252172264_f3e3aeac26.jpg)

photo by [Mario Carvajal](http://www.mariocarvajal.com/ "Mario Carvajal
website") CC-by

A group of videobloggers from Colombia decided to make 2010 into the year for
videblogging, and[ set out to make a video a day during
2010](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2010/01/07/colombia-videobloggers-
make-1-video-per-day-in-2010/). Today we bring you a selection of videos from
the city of Cartagena in Colombia: [UNESCO World Heritage
Site](http://whc.unesco.org/en/list/285) and a top travel destination
according to[ Frommer's travel guides.
](http://www.cartagenainfo.net/noticias/bestdestination/index.html)

[Erika Pao](http://www.erikapao.blogspot.com/) and [Luisa
Santiaga](http://luisasantiaga.com/) are two girls who live in Cartagena and
wished to show Cartagena from the perspective of those who live there, seeking
to bring out the daily events and commonplace to light:

> contar a través del video toda esa cotidianidad e historias anónimas que nos
> rodean; toda esa riqueza cultural y social en las que estamos inmersos pero
> que muchos desconocen de nuestra ciudad

Tell through video all the everyday events and anonymous stories that surround
us; all the cultural and social wealth that we are immersed in but many ignore
about our city.

Part of the successful national Colombian campaign to increase tourism has
been related to their slogan: Colombia is Passion. But the efforts are not
only seen outside the country, inside, it has also been employed to strengthen
the national pride. Such is the case with their [promotional event in
Cartagena](http://www.cartagena365.com/2010/01/dia-15-colombia-es-
pasion.html): in one of the plazas of the walled city, they placed sculptures
and images that reflect the campaign. The song used to accompany the video is
a joint effort between many Colombian artists for the campaign and is called
_Colombia es Pasión_ :

January 2nd is the [Candelaria Virgin
procession,](http://www.cartagena365.com/2010/02/la-virgen-de-la-
candelaria.html) where Catholics climb up to the convent at the top of Popa
hill and then bring down the Virgin on their shoulders to the chapel at the
bottom of the hill:

In Cartagena, near the Carriage Plaza there is a covered passageway that used
to be where slaves were sold. At the end of the XIX century, it started
selling much more palatable wares: candy. [The Candy Portal
](http://www.cartagena365.com/2010/02/el-portal-de-los-dulces.html)sells many
of the traditional sweets produced in the region: Tamarind, coconut and sugar
cane concoctions.

There are also other commonplace images, in [this next
video](http://www.cartagena365.com/2010/01/dia-24-ninos-jugando-futbol-en-
arroz.html), barefoot children play soccer on the dusty streets under the
midday sun in the “Cheap Rice” neighborhood.

These next videos show a bit about the food in Cartagena. First, a mysterious
drink made of rice, milk and flavorings, with nutmeg, sweetened condensed
milk, chocolate chips and ice, it is described by the vendor on his sign as :
_Exquisite, nourishing and refreshing_ :

Another traditional food staple in Cartagena is the “patacón pisao”, a
squashed double fried plantain that is eaten at every meal. [Luisa
Santiaga](http://www.cartagena365.com/2010/02/el-patacon-pisao.html) takes us
through the step by step process of peeling, cutting, frying, squashing,
dunking, and frying plantains:

This last video takes us out of the walled city and into the streets where
locals live, shop and move around:

If you want to see more of Cartagena through the eyes of these two women, you
can visit and subscribe to the [Cartagena 365
page](http://www.cartagena365.com/) or follow
[@luisasantiaga](http://twitter.com/Luisasantiaga) and
[@erikapao](http://twitter.com/erikapao) on twitter where they twit about
their latest uploaded videos.

In future posts, we will bring you videos from other Colombian vloggers
participating in the 365 project. Do you know of any videoblogger we should
write about on Global Voices? Please write to us and let us know!

