The internet is usually touted as a space for dialogue and peaceful exchange,
but in the case of Iran, the political conflict has also morphed into new
forms of online “warfare” where the most powerful weapons are those that
silence free speech.

Below, are three major initiatives – both failed and successful – that we
could call innovations in militarism on the internet.

![irca](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-content/uploads/2010/02/irca.png)

**Political hacking**

The [Iranian Cyber Army](www.%20ircarmy.com) is just one example out of
several militant Islamic initiatives that have only grown more fervent since
the [elections in June
2009](https://globalvoicesonline.org/specialcoverage/iranian-election-2009/).
This[](www. ircarmy.com)
[hacker](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hacker_%28computing%29) group is perhaps
the strongest Iranian or Iran-related militant Islamist project on the
internet. They have successfully targeted websites in several countries,
illustrating that the internet truly has no borders, and that even big-name
websites can be fragile against unknown attackers.

The army’s victims go beyond the usual targets such as independent Iranian
news websites like [_Zamaneh_](http://www.radiozamaneh.com/) or Green Movement
ones like [_Jaras_](http://www.rahesabz.net/) and
[_Kalameh_](http://www.kaleme.org/). On December 18 2009, they were able to
bring down the international micro-blogging site Twitterr. The service had
been used by many Iranian protesters to [make news
headlines](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2009/07/04/iran-myth-and-reality-
about-twitter/). The [message](http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/8420233.stm) left by
the group during the one hour that Twitter was hacked illustrates their
ideology:

> THIS SITE HAS BEEN HACKED BY IRANIAN CYBER ARMY iRANiAN.CYBER.ARMY@GMAIL.COM  
>  U.S.A. Think They Controlling And Managing Internet By Their Access, But
> THey Don't, We Control And Manage Internet By Our Power, So Do Not Try To
> Stimulation Iranian Peoples To….  
>  NOW WHICH COUNTRY IN EMBARGO LIST? IRAN? USA?

On its own website, the Iranian Cyber Army [has left ](www.
ircarmy.com)several messages and warnings, including that foreign servers are
no guarantee of safety for Iranian sites and blogs; that personal information
about site owners will be divulged; and they have also issued a special
warning to pro-Green website _[Mowjcamp](http://www.mowjcamp.com/)_. Finally,
they threaten that a virtual attack is considered a first step, but they do
not expand on further steps.

For unknown reasons, the Iranian Cyber Army also [hacked the popular Chinese
search engine, Baidu](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2010/01/12/china-iranian-
cyber-army-aims-at-chinese-critics-misses-target-entirely/) in January 2010.
Many online commenters guessed that it had to do with expressed support for
the Iranian Green Movement by Chinese netizens.

**A failed blogging expansion project**

At the end of 2008, The [Islamic Revolutionary Guards
Corps](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Army_of_the_Guardians_of_the_Islamic_Revolution)
(IRGC) made an historic announcement to launch [10,000
blogs](http://blogs.law.harvard.edu/idblog/2009/01/08/irans-revolutionary-
guards-take-on-the-internet/) in support of the paramilitary
[Basij](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Basij) forces. IRGC’s official
publication, _Sobh Sadegh_ , wrote that the IRGC considered the Internet and
other digital devices including mobile SMS as a threat to be controlled. It
announced that the 10,000 blogs would promote revolutionary ideas. The IRGC
considers the Internet an instrument for [ “velvet
revolution”](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Velvet_Revolution) (non-violent
overthrow of government by foreign influence) and warned that enemy nations
have invested in this tool to topple the Islamic Regime. The project never
came to fruition, but it would have been the biggest military blogging
project.

**Crowd sourcing identities**

In March 2009, the IRGC [cracked down](http://english.webgardian.com/?p=22) on
several groups who had set up anti-Islamic and pornographic Internet websites.
Around the same time, the organized-crime-fighting unit of the IRGC launched a
website named _[Gerdab](http://www.gerdab.ir/)_ (meaning ‘vortex’) where news
and photos of arrested people were published. During the post-election
protests in 2009, [_Gerdab_ published photos of
protesters](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2009/06/27/iranian-officials-crowd-
source-protester-identities-online/), and asked the Iranian public to help
identify them. Islamist militants were [crowd
sourcing](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Crowdsourcing) information in the
virtual world to target real people.

The Iranian Cyber Army shares some charateristics of _Gerdab_ , but their is
no real evidence of an official connection between the two. Iran's official
news/propaganda agency, IRNA [once
claimed](http://www2.irna.ir/fa/news/view/menu-376/8810206527130946.htm) that
the Iranian Cyber Army were a project of the IGRC, but this has never been
confirmed. It is not known who the hackers are nor where they are based, only
that they target “Iranian opposition websites”.

Two Iranian bloggers who asked to remain anonymous even speculated that the
Iranian Cyber Army could be based in China or be helped by Chinese hackers,
and that targeting Baidu may have been an attempt to blur this.

**The death of dialogue**

The dream of the internet is that it could become a virtual environment where
Islamists and non-Islamists could dialogue instead of shooting each other.
We've seen small instances where it has happened. For example, once about
three and half years ago, Islamist and non-Islamists Iranian bloggers [debated
online the pros and cons of
martyrdom](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2006/06/23/to-be-or-not-to-be-a-
martyrdom-seeker/). Today, the emphasis on both sides is on beefing up both
virtual and real world elimination.

It's only fair to mention that supporters of the Iranian opposition have
employed similar attack methods. A group that calls itself [The Green Cyber
Army](../2010/01/24/irangreen-cyber-army-vs-pro-state-cyber-army/) targeted a
a Basij militia website ([moghavemat.ir](http://moghavemat.ir)) in 2010 and
has threatened others; several pro-opposition bloggers have uploaded photos of
people [alleged to be](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2009/06/27/iranian-
officials-crowd-source-protester-identities-online/) undercover security
agents; and the hacking of state websites by anonymous groups is ordinary
business.

The victims of all this activity are not only the hacked websites, but the
future potential for communication and greater understanding between Iranian
citizens online.

