[![books by br1dotcom](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2010/02/4166891488_9fe92b1a31.jpg)](http://www.flickr.com/photos/br1dotcom/4166891488/)

books by br1dotcom

The mobile library has become a staple in many library systems, bringing books
to those who cannot access the libraries themselves. However, in many places
due to bad road conditions or lack of funding, the traditional system of
rigging a bus or truck as a library is not possible. Thus, library carts,
donkey libraries and motorcycle libraries [have appeared
](http://archive.ifla.org/IV/ifla66/papers/102-175e.htm)as viable options to
bring books to the communities.

Through the [Bilingual
Librarian](http://www.bilinguallibrarian.com/2007/03/10/8/) blog we can catch
glimpses of these alternative mobile libraries. First, lets talk about the the
[donkey libraries](http://www.ayokaproductions.org/content/biblioburro-donkey-
library). It seems that the most commonly mentioned example is the
[“biblioburro” of Colombia](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=wuTswmx9TQU), run
by schoolteacher Luis Soriano who loads up his donkey, climbs on top, holds
onto a foldable picnic table with the _Biblioburro_ sign and rides more than 4
hours each way to deliver books to children who don't have access to them. He
reads them stories, helps them with homework and gives them the possibility to
enjoy books they don't have at home. As he explains, through books, children
can see other places, other people and can learn about their rights, their
duties and the commitment they have with society, and in having this knowledge
they can say no to violence and war.

And this video has had a great impact on Luis’ life: [after the video became
public](http://www.ayokaproductions.org/content/biblioburro-updates),
donations started pouring in and now, the library which was under construction
has been finished: there are shelves, some tables and the 250 children of La
Gloria can now visit the library during the week. During the weekends, Luis
continues to ride his donkeys, bringing the library to those farther away.
Following is a [thank you video
](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=1gxNXgrIQ2c)where Mr. Soriano thanks everyone
who donated for helping his dream come true:

Donkey libraries seem to be catching on. In another region of Colombia, the
Arhuaco Indians are benefiting from the same system in the Santa Marta
mountain range area. The _biblioburro_ blog [tells their story through
pictures](http://www.biblioburro.blogspot.com/). In neighboring Venezuela,
they are [using mules instead of
donkeys](http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/6929404.stm), and plan to add movie
projectors and Internet access to them, to bridge not only the literacy but
also the digital gap. In Ethiopia, as the [following video
shows](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=sGnCCe0PZHo), Ethiopian-American citizen
Yohannes Gebregiorgis returned to Ethiopia to run a donkey mobile library. The
greatest challenge is finding books in any of the languages commonly spoken in
Ethiopia. His solution? He wrote one of his childhood stories in 3 different
languages, and he's working towards getting more storybooks published.

Joining donkeys and mules in the educational process are camels. The [Camel
libraries in Kenya
](http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/shared/spl/hi/picture_gallery/05/africa_kenyan_camel_library/html/1.stm)take
books to schools in the region so children can learn to love reading, and also
deliver books to the nomadic communities. Where there are people who move with
the seasons, libraries have to move with them. In impoverished countries,
books are a luxury few can afford. These mobile camel libraries take story
books as well as non-fiction or school books which subscribers can take home
for two weeks, after which the camel library returns and they can renew their
books or take out new ones. Following is a video story of a child seeing the
camel library arrive, taking out books and then teaching his father numbers
from one of the books he takes home:

This next video is a short documentary piece by [Ruud Elmendorp
](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Rn4Zlt8Lx-k)on the Camel libraries:

In Peru, the motorized mobile library was scaled down, and that's how the
[motorcycle library ](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=HE40oLnBBD4)was born.
Part of the Futura Project, the [Obraje Community
library](http://http://bibliotecaobraje.blogspot.com/) also brings books to
the children in other communities, as part of the cultural and literary
activities they also host:

