As is the case with many of the Obama administration's accomplishments during
its first year, advancements in diplomatic relationship between the US and
Cuba have been subtle. Yet small changes in policy may mean bigger shifts in
behavior, especially when it comes to Cuban-Americans and the voting booth.

Bloggers in Miami and Cuba are buzzing over the news that US Representative
Lincoln Diaz-Balart will not run for reelection in the fall. Diaz-Balart, a
Republican, is a staunch supporter of the trade embargo against Cuba, and he
took his resignation speech as an opportunity to highlight his role in
codifying the embargo. As a senior member of the House Rules Committee, the
Ranking Member of the Subcommittee on Legislative and Budget Process, and the
Co-Chairman of the Florida Congressional Delegation, Diaz-Balart's absence
will definitely be felt.

Blue in Miami notes, in an excellent write up of what's been reported so far
about Diaz-Balart's district (the 21st), that retiring Congressman's brother
will most likely leave his own House seat–representing the 25th–to run for the
now empty spot.

” I used to think it was natural to run for re-election in the district you
already represent, especially if you're running unopposed, but I guess that's
not true if your poll numbers are slipping.”

The elder Diaz-Balart's district is seen as more favorable to Republicans. But
Blue in Miami says that there is a definite opportunity for Democrats to pick
up both seats. And Down With Tyranny, anti-embargo blog, writes:
“demographically, this district is no longer safe for Republicans.” Reuters
quotes a Cuban-American businessman as saying that “there are a significant
amount of Cuban Americans who are voting with their feet–” , referring to the
increased communication between Cuban-Americans and their relatives or friends
in Cuba as a result of the easing of restrictions on travel for American
citizens with relatives in Cuba.

The blogosphere is definitely interpreting this event as a sign of the
political winds. One commenter at Penultimos Dias says:

Jamás comprendí por qué necesitábamos dos Díaz-Balart en el Congreso:

I never understodd why we needed two Diaz-Balart(s) in Congress.

And Havana Times paints the news as a sign of just how retrograde the embargo
is: “The US economic blockade on Cuba has lasted about a half century and one
of its biggest supporters, Miami Rep. Lincoln Diaz-Balart, threw in the towel
on Thursday”

As is the case with many of the Obama administration's accomplishments during
its first year, advancements in relations between the US and Cuba have been
subtle. Yet small changes in policy may mean bigger shifts in behavior,
especially when it comes to Cuban-Americans and the voting booth.

Bloggers in Miami and Cuba are buzzing over the news that US Representative
Lincoln Diaz-Balart will not run for reelection in the fall. Diaz-Balart, a
Republican, is a staunch supporter of the trade embargo against Cuba, and he
took his [resignation speech ](http://www.miamiherald.com/news/more-
info/story/1474841.html )as an opportunity to highlight his role in codifying
the blockade. As a senior member of the House Rules Committee, the Ranking
Member of the Subcommittee on Legislative and Budget Process, and the Co-
Chairman of the Florida Congressional Delegation, Diaz-Balart's absence will
definitely be felt.

In an excellent write up of what's been reported so far about Diaz-Balart's
district (the 21st), [Blue in Miami notes
](http://blueinmiami.blogspot.com/2010/02/lincoln-diaz-balart-retires-
fl-21.html)that the retiring Congressman's brother will most likely leave his
own House seat–representing the 25th–to run for the vacated spot. “I used to
think it was natural to run for re-election in the district you already
represent, especially if you're running unopposed, but I guess that's not true
if your poll numbers are slipping,” they write.

The 21st is seen as a more favorable district for Republicans than the 25th.
But Blue in Miami says that there is a definite opportunity for Democrats to
pick up both seats.

“Demographically, this district is no longer safe for Republicans,” writes[
Down With Tyranny](http://downwithtyranny.blogspot.com/2010/02/anti-cuba-
fanatic-lincoln-diaz-balart-r.html). And Reuters quotes a [Cuban-American
businessman](http://www.reuters.com/article/idUSTRE61A41520100211 ) as saying:
“There are a significant amount of Cuban Americans who are voting with their
feet,” in reference to the effects that the recent easing of travel
restrictions for Cuban-Americans who wish to visit the island may be having on
their politics.

The blogosphere is definitely interpreting this event as a sign of the
political winds. [One commenter at Penultimos
Dias](http://www.penultimosdias.com/2010/02/11/lincoln-diaz-balart-anunciara-
su-retiro-esta-tarde/#comment-83971) says:

> “Jamás comprendí por qué necesitábamos dos Díaz-Balart en el Congreso

“I never understood why we needed two Diaz-Balarts in Congress.”

And[ Havana Times
](http://www.havanatimes.org/?p=19628&utm_source=feedburner&utm_medium=feed&utm_campaign=Feed:+havanatimes/apge+\(Havana+Times.org\)&utm_content=Google+Reader)paints
the news as a sign of just how retrograde the embargo is, writing: “The US
economic blockade on Cuba has lasted about a half century and one of its
biggest supporters, Miami Rep. Lincoln Diaz-Balart, threw in the towel on
Thursday.”

There's no way to know for sure if the small steps taken by the Obama
administration is making Cuban-Americans rethink their stance on the blockade,
but it will be interesting to watch these races for any sign of a leftward
shift in the Cuban emigre portion of the electorate.

