[![Larry Lessig by Robert Scoble](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2010/02/2236177028_17d7960c6a-300x199.jpg)](http://www.flickr.com/photos/scobleizer/2236177028/)

Larry Lessig by Robert Scoble

What is fair use, how does copyright fit into the digital age and how can
commentary, teaching, remixing and research with video be freely developed?
[Tune in ](http://openvideoalliance.org/2010/01/announcing-wireside-chat-with-
lawrence-lessig/?l=es)on February 25th 6:00pm US Eastern time (GMT -5) to
watch and listen to Lawrence Lessig as he discusses these topics at the[ Open
Video Alliance website ](http://openvideoalliance.org/event/lessig/)or check
out for screenings in your city. At the moment, the only screenings outside
the US will be in Canada, Guatemala, Brazil, Israel and India, however, if you
are interested, you can host your own by contacting the[ Open Video
Alliance](conference@openvideoalliance.org).

[Lawrence Lessig](http://lessig.org/blog/), law professor and political
activist who is also the founding board member of Creative Commons, will speak
for 45 minutes, followed by a 30 minute question and answer session moderated
by Elizabeth Stark of the Open Video Alliance. Questions can be submitted by
using the hashtag on twitter #wireside. While on twitter, why not follow
[@Lessig](http://twitter.com/lessig) and
[@openvideo](http://twitter.com/openvideo/)?

Are you interested in Open video? Then [don't forget the Open Video in 60
seconds contest](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2009/11/23/video-open-video-
contest-for-trip-to-sxsw-interactive-festival/) to win a trip to the South by
Southwest (SXSW) Interactive Festival, deadline is this Sunday, February 14th.
Or just take a look at the submitted entries on [what open video means to many
folks all over the world. ](http://contest.openvideoalliance.org/)

Still not sure about what Open Video means? Why not take a look at [this entry
for the contest by Qasim
Virjee](http://contest.openvideoalliance.org/video/17869/what-is-open-video)
which explains what Open Video means to him:

[What is Open Video?](http://vimeo.com/9024114) from [Qasim
Virjee](http://vimeo.com/qasimvirjee) on [Vimeo](http://vimeo.com).

