Franklin Brito, a farmer from the [state of
Bolívar](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bolivar_State) in southeastern Venezuela
had been on a hunger strike since July 2009 outside of the offices of the
Organization of American States (OAS) in the capital city of Caracas. In
December 2009, the Public Prosecutor's Office requested a court order to place
him in a hospital, which was granted. Brito has been in a military hospital
since December 10, a decision that he and his family contested. They are
demanding that he be treated by a doctor of his choice, but the appeal against
the court order was rejected on December 21. (Watch
[video](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=OA25Vwe4Mb0) of the moment in which
Franklin Brito was taken from OAS to the Military Hospital )

On January 9, hospital staff told Brito’s daughter, who was visiting him, that
he was being taken for therapy. She says that they sedated him before taking
him away. His family was not allowed to visit him the following days. Two days
later, [the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights called on the Venezuelan
government to allow him visits as well as access and treatment from a doctor
of his choice
[es]](http://www.espaciopublico.info/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=655&Itemid=1),
or one provided by the International Committee of the Red Cross. That request
was not granted by Venezuelan government. A similar request from the [Caracas
Psychology Bar was also ignored
[es]](http://hablavenezuela.com/2010/01/15/colegio-de-psicologos-preocupado-
por-tratamiento-no-autorizado-a-franklin-brito/).

(Watch [video](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=uS4ZdnMZ6t8) of the press
conference conducted by relatives of Brito and human rights organizations
calling for his release from the military custody / Spanish )

Brito began his protest in 2006 against a decision by the Insituto Nacional de
Tierras (National Land Institute), a national government office, which said
that his lands were unproductive, a charge that Brito denied. The Institute
ordered the confiscation of his lands. Some believe that the decision was a
reprisal for corruption allegations he made against the Mayor of the nearby
city of Sucre. His protests since then have included several hunger strikes.
Even though the central government eventually returned ownership of the
disputed lands and offered him compensation, the authorities failed to evict a
group of people who have been occupying his land, leading Brito to begin his
most recent hunger strike.

Brito's hunger strike has been a topic of discussion Twitter, under the
hashtag [#FranklinBrito](http://search.twitter.com/search?q=FranklinBrito). An
orthodontist, Eloy Bustamante [@eloybc](http://twitter.com/eloybc), who
examined Brito in the military hospital on January 19 tweeted:

> Odontológicamente muy comprometido. Sistemicamente esta un poco mejor. Es un
> señor con mucha entereza. No tiene rastros de enfermedad mental

His teeth are damaged. Systemically he is a little better. He is a gentleman
with great integrity. No signs of mental illness.

The Twitter user [@radardebarrios](http://twitter.com/radardebarrios) also
wrote about and took a photograph of the protests outside the hospital where
Brito was being attended to:

> Hace minutos. Dirigentes d barrios de Caracas protestan frente al Hospital
> Militar en solidaridad con Franklin Brito! http://tweetphoto.com/9214426

A few minutes ago. Leaders from Caracas neighborhoods protested in front of
the Military Hospital in solidarity with Franklin Brito!
<http://tweetphoto.com/9214426>

On January 16, Amnesty International issued [an Urgent Action for
Brito](http://hablavenezuela.com/2010/01/16/hunger-striking-farmer-missing-in-
vhttps://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-admin/media-
upload.php?post_id=121941&type=image&TB_iframe=true&width=640&height=556enezuela/)
urging the authorities to reveal his whereabouts and to guarantees his safety,
as well as to respect his wishes to be attended to by a doctor his choice.

Since then, Brito's wife Elena started her own hunger striker and took part in
a demonstration on January 23, while seated in a wheelchair.

[![Photo of Elena Brito at demonstration courtesy of Brito and Habla
Venezuela.](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2010/02/ElenaBrito1.jpg)](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2010/02/ElenaBrito1.jpg)

Photo of Elena Brito at demonstration courtesy of Brito and Habla Venezuela.

Documents about Brito's case can be found on the blog _[Prohibido Olvidar
[es]](http://grupo11prohibidoolvidar.blogspot.com/2010/01/documentos-para-
entender-el-caso-de.html)_ (Forbidden to Forget).

In another twist to the story, the Public Prosecutor's Office stated that
Brito was mentally ill and unable to make his own decisions. The case is
regarded as an application of a popular doctrine among some government
supporters, [who label those who are strongly critical of the administration
of Hugo Chavez, as psychotic (“disociados”)
[es]](http://www.aporrea.org/medios/a80645.html).

The [matter is openly stated](http://www.colofon.org/2010/01/18/los-
opositores-son-enfermos-mentales/) in _Colofon [es]_ , a blog written by
Rodolfo, a journalist and human rights activist:

> Rondaba por allí de vez en cuando cuando algunos inistían en llamarlos
> disociados pero con el caso de Franklin Brito que fue capturado de su huelga
> de hambre y trasladado a un hospital militar para luego ser llevado al área
> de siquiatría la tendencia se ha confirmado. Ahora el gobierno al que
> proteste, al que se le oponga lo considera un enfermo mental.

It was around every now and then when some people insist in calling them
psychotic [to people against Chavez government] but it is in the case of
Franklin Brito, when he is taken from his hunger strike under police custody
to a military hospital and put into the psychiatric ward when the trend is
confirmed. Now, the government would consider those who protest and those who
are dissidents, as mental patients

