_Editor's Note: This is the third and final in a series of posts about
graffiti and urban art around Latin America. To visit the other posts in the
series, please click[here
](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2010/01/11/graffiti-and-urban-art-voices-
from-latin-american-streets-i/)and
[here](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2010/01/18/graffiti-and-urban-art-
voices-from-latin-american-streets-ii/)._

In public spaces, street art (or urban art) represents the voice of the
community, marginal groups, and young people that strive to be heard, often
defying the notion of private property. Latin America is not an exception for
this. Some of Latin American street art is distinct from what is created by
the hip-hop movement, focusing on political messages and stories of struggle
that speak directly to the viewer.

Through the lens of bloggers, Flickr users and communities, and contributors
on YouTube, we offer you an online tour of the art of the streets that
communicate secrets and passions at every turn.

**Venezuela**

Venezuelan graffiti has extensive documentation on the Internet, and a notable
part comes from users that act as collectors for all kinds of purposes. In
_Crónicas de un Aprendiz de Periodista_ blogger Jorge González [interviewed
graffiti writers [es]](http://cronicasdeun.blogspot.com/2007/02/graffiti-
urbano-del-bronx-caracas.html) from several cities about the main
characteristics of this type of urban art as an exercise to practice
journalism. He presents inside opinions from the artists themselves, like
writer MK 21 from Catia:

> «mucha gente se encuentra segura y a gusto cuando escribe su nombre. Tenemos
> la sensación de afianzarnos, de identificarnos con nosotros mismos. Cuanto
> más escribes tu nombre, más piensas en ti y comprendes cómo eres. En cuanto
> empiezas a hacerlo te reafirmas como individuo, tienes identidad».

«many people feel comfortable and secure when they write their names. We have
feelings of high esteem, and identification with ourselves. When you write
your name, the more you think of yourself, and understand how you are. When
you start doing [making art] you reaffirm yourself as an individual, you have
an identity».

Another collecting approach comes from blogger BlogZup, who gathered some of
the [best graffiti works in Venezuela
[es]](http://zuplemento.wordpress.com/2008/07/22/top-50-graffitis-de-
venezuela/), creating an avalanche of responses (100 comments). On the other
hand, the blog _Solo en Venezuela_ [compiled graffiti and written messages
with humorous content [es]](http://www.soloenvenezuela.com/tag/graffiti/)
found on streets around the country.

[![Photo by blmurch. Used following a Creative Commons license. Taken from
http://www.flickr.com/photos/blmurch/296870012/](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2010/01/venezuela.jpg)](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2010/01/venezuela.jpg)

Photo by blmurch. Used following a Creative Commons license. Taken from
http://www.flickr.com/photos/blmurch/296870012/

Graffiti and street art can also be subjects of academic study, as a part of
contemporary art forms. For example, the Network of Scientific Journals of
Latin America and the Caribbean, Spain and Portugal (Red de Revistas
Científicas de América Latina y el Caribe, España y Portugal) [has an
interesting collection of articles related to graffiti
[es]](http://redalyc.uaemex.mx/buscador/search.jsp?query=graffiti&rbArt=rbArt),
available to download in PDF format. One of them is the study “El graffiti en
la V República Venezolana. Estudio del graffiti sobre asuntos públicos”, which
[analyzes the political content of 740 explicit graffiti pieces
[es/en]](http://redalyc.uaemex.mx/redalyc/src/inicio/Resumen.jsp?iCve=81965503&Id=2)
on the streets of Caracas as a way to evaluate the public opinion.

More photos can be found on the Flickr group _[Mural paintings and graffiti in
Venezuela](http://www.flickr.com/groups/murales_y_grafitis_de_venezuela/)_ ,
which is joined by more than 100 members.

**Mexico**

On the ground, sharing the message of the street art might be as important as
the work itself. As a user, Mexican artist Mr. Fly has a [complete website
[es]](http://www.mrfly.org) for his work, and supports his portfolio with
videos on YouTube and his work on Flickr and Fotolog. He works with stencils,
posters, and stickers to leave traces of his imagination on public spaces
throughout the city, flying from one spot to another:

The intro of the video reads the following:

> En esta puta ciudad caótica, donde el arte es privilegio, recorrer las
> calles es una necedad, una necedad necesaria en busca de la libre expresión.

In this f*cking chaotic city, where art is a privilege, walking the streets on
a whim, a necessary whim in search of freedom of expression.

Collective [Lapiztola](http://lapiztola.blogspot.com/), from Oaxaca, mixes
stencils and serigraphy to create political images with contrasts of textures.
[In their blog, they document [es]](http://lapiztola.blogspot.com/) both their
contributions to “formal” events and what they create for the streets.

[![By Lapiztola. Used with permission. Taken from
http://lapiztola.blogspot.com/2008/08/mujeres-de-
maz.html](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2010/01/LaPiztolaCurtiduria-782471.jpg)](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2010/01/LaPiztolaCurtiduria-782471.jpg)

By Lapiztola. Used with permission. Taken from
http://lapiztola.blogspot.com/2008/08/mujeres-de-maz.html

The above work is presented in the post “[Mujeres de maíz
[es]](http://lapiztola.blogspot.com/2008/08/mujeres-de-maz.html)” (“ _Women of
corn_ “) with the following explanation:

> Estencil pintado en la curtiduria con motivo de la presentación de una
> exposición itinerante formada por artistas mujeres que buscan usar su arte
> para llamar la atencion sobre el tema del Maíz y que es lo que significa
> para el futuro de México; el aumento del precio de la tortilla, el
> desinteres del gobierno por la economia campesina indigena y la identidad
> cultural.

Stencil painted on tanned hides for a presentation of an itinerant exposition
by women artists that use their art to call attention to the subject of corn
and what it means to the future of Mexico; the rise in the price of tortillas,
and government indifference to indigenous agricultural workers and their
cultural identity.

[An interesting video interview in Spanish
[es]](http://www.andamosarmados.com/?p=26249) is available in the Mexican blog
_Andamos armados_.

From Monterrey, Los Contratistas is a collective of street artists who present
[their works on their blog [es]](http://loscontratistas.wordpress.com/), as
well as events, photo galleries, and details of their installations using
mixed techniques (including objects, disassembled parts, recycled material).

[![By Screw. Used with permission. Taken from
http://loscontratistas.wordpress.com/2008/09/14/mty-
saltillo/dscf6241/](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2010/01/contratistas4.jpg)](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2010/01/contratistas4.jpg)

By Screw. Used with permission. Taken from
http://loscontratistas.wordpress.com/2008/09/14/mty-saltillo/dscf6241/

On their blog, [they share a manifesto
[es]](http://loscontratistas.wordpress.com/manifiesto-contratista/) that
explains their name (“contractors”) and their collective philosophy:

> Entiendas[e] como contratista cualquier persona que demuestre el oficio, la
> rudeza y buena vibra para realizar cualquier proyecto de electricidad, arte,
> plomería, albañilería o expresión personal; ya sea en las alturas o a nivel
> de “cancha”.

“Contratista” (“contractor”) is understood as any person that shows the
workmanship, the strength, and good vibes to create a project of electricity,
art, plumbing, brickwork or personal expression; whether is it from the top or
at ground level.

Despite its frequent clashes [with
legality](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2009/06/02/mexico-young-graffiti-
writers-arrested-in-monterrey/), the graffiti and street art scene in Mexico
is strong. A complete documentary of the Mexican street art [can be found on
YouTube [es]](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=HMOkaaRWeBw), created by
[Aiwey.tv [es]](http://aiwey.tv/). More artists and works can also be found in
the Flickr groups [Street Art Mexico
[es]](http://www.flickr.com/groups/street_art_mexico/), [Mexican Bomber
[es]](http://www.flickr.com/groups/1011223@N24/) and [Stencil + Arte Urbano
(Mexico) [es]](http://www.flickr.com/groups/stencil-plus-urbanart/), the
latter with +500 members.

**Afterword**

These examples of contemporary expression defy and contrast with the common
idea of art, which is usually portrayed as something so valuable that it needs
to be protected and kept in a safe place, like high-security musems and elite
galleries. With a growing acceptance of community, Latin American graffiti
writers and urban artists take the Internet as they take any other public
space: with the strength of unique voices that reach out to others by any
means possible.

