![11feb](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2010/02/11feb.jpg)Iran's [Green
Movement](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Green_Movement) is ready to defy the
Iranian regime with protests once again – this time during the 31st
anniversary of the Islamic Revolution on 11 Februrary (22 Bahman). During this
week the Iranian State will
[celebrate](http://edition.cnn.com/2010/WORLD/meast/02/08/iran.revolution.anniversary/index.html)
the day that marked the end of the Iran's western-backed monarchy and the
beginning of an Islamic republic. [According
to](http://latimesblogs.latimes.com/babylonbeyond/2010/02/iran-internet-
access-text-messaging-service-down-as-bahman-22-protests-approach.html) news
reports from inside Iran, internet access,
[email](http://mashable.com/2010/02/10/iran-bans-gmail/), and text-messaging
services have been disrupted the past days in advance of the protests.

The Iranian opposition has
[protested](https://globalvoicesonline.org/specialcoverage/iranian-
election-2009/) since June 2009 against the Iranian government and the alleged
manipulation of the presidential election's results.

Iranian citizen media and artists commented on the upcoming day of protest and
created art works.

[_Soheil Tavakoli_ ,](http://www.youtube.com/user/SoheilTavakoli) a creative
artist has created a dramatic new video montage of digital paintings (part 3
of a series). At the end of the video the artist envisions victory for the
Green Movement and a free Iran – where even clerics are willing to be
photographed next to women wearing skirts and no veils!

_United4Iran_ that [coordinates](http://united4iran.com/about/mission/) and
amplifies the voices of activists, academics, NGOs, artists, and others who
desire to work on issues related to human and civil rights in Iran, also
published a video to inform about demonstrations outside Iran related to 11
February.

[Green Wave Voice](http://greenwavevoice.com) aslo created a trailer for the
11 February demonstration where the words “courage”, “loyality” and
“democracy” have been emphasised.

