We're delighted to announce the [Global Voices Citizen Media Summit
2010](https://summit2010.globalvoicesonline.org/)! Our gathering takes place
this year in Santiago, Chile on May 6-7, 2010.

Visit the [ Summit web site](https://summit2010.globalvoicesonline.org/) for
background information on [the goals of the
meeting](https://summit2010.globalvoicesonline.org/about/), the [program of
events](https://summit2010.globalvoicesonline.org/program/), [registration
details](https://summit2010.globalvoicesonline.org/about/register/) and
information about the vibrant city of Santiago. Among the highlights of the
proceedings will be the announcement of the winners of the [Breaking Borders
award](https://summit2010.globalvoicesonline.org/2010/02/breaking-borders-
award/), a new prize created by Google and Global Voices to honor outstanding
web projects initiated by individuals or groups demonstrating courage, energy
and resourcefulness in using the Internet to promote freedom of expression.

![](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2010/02/screenshot_iphone.jpg)

Over the next few days and weeks we'll be fleshing out the program, adding
speaker bios, a list of attendees and more â€” and do keep checking in at the
site for blog posts and commentary from Summit participants and others, as
well as to join in the conversation.

You can also help spread the word about the Global Voices Summit by flying one
of ou[r Summit badges or
banners](https://summit2010.globalvoicesonline.org/about/badges/) on your blog
or web site.

The Global Voices Citizen Media Summit 2010 has been made possible thanks to
the generous support of the [MacArthur Foundation](http://www.macfound.org/),
[Google](http://google.com/), [Open Society Institute](http://www.soros.org/),
[Knight Foundation](http://www.knightfdn.org/) and
[Yahoo!](http://www.yahoo.com/).

Current major sponsors include MacArthur Foundation, Google, Open Society
Institute, Knight Foundation and Yahoo!

