[![Journalist, writer, and blogger Andre Bagoo. Photo by Gerard H. Gaskin,
used by permission.](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2010/01/andre-bagoo-
portrait.jpg)](http://www.gerardhgaskin.com/)

Journalist, writer, and blogger Andre Bagoo. Photo by Gerard H. Gaskin, used
by permission.

Andre Bagoo, 26, is a Trinidadian writer and journalist. Since October 2006 he
has been based at the [_Trinidad and Tobago Newsday_](http://newsday.co.tt/),
one of the country's three daily newspapers, where he is a specialist writer
covering politics, with a sideline in arts and culture. He is also a poet and
fiction writer, and has been published in journals such as [_The Caribbean
Review of Books_](http://caribbeanreviewofbooks.com) and the [_Boston
Review_](http://bostonreview.net/BR34.6/bagoo.php).

Bagoo is best known in Trinidad for his fearless, hard-hitting political
reporting, which has sometimes brought him into conflict with members of the
current government. In November 2009, the Privileges Committee of the
[Trinidad and Tobago House of
Representatives](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/House_of_Representatives_of_Trinidad_and_Tobago)
recommended that he be banned from the media gallery of Parliament after
finding him guilty of an offence. The Parliamentary session expired before the
full House voted on the recommendation, so the ban never took effect, but the
Media Association of Trinidad and Tobago [denounced the
move](http://nicholaslaughlin.blogspot.com/2009/11/slipping-down-slope-since-
media.html) as “attempted intimidation … of journalists whose reporting may
have embarrassed or offended the Government.”

In addition, Bagoo is a blogger. He started his personal blog,
[_TATTOO_](http://andrebagoo.blogspot.com/), in 2007. There he writes about
current affairs, the arts, and sundry matters. In October 2009, he launched a
new blog, [_PLEASURE_](http://www.pleasurett.blogspot.com/), devoted to
covering “art in all its forms”. It amounts to a one-man cultural journal,
posting reviews, essays, interviews, and news on visual art, literature,
music, theatre, and film in Trinidad and Tobago and elsewhere.

I recently interviewed Bagoo via email about the relationship between his
blogging and his newspaper writing, the Trinidad and Tobago mainstream media's
attitudes to online channels, and the possible role of blogging in ensuring
press freedom.

•••

**Nicholas Laughlin:** You started your blog _TATTOO_ in May 2007, and for
over two years you posted things like book and film reviews there, in addition
to personal reflections. Why did you decide to start a second blog, _PLEASURE_
, in 2009? Did you feel the kinds of things you wanted to write about — the
kinds of cultural coverage you'd been doing there — needed a fresh start?

**Andre Bagoo:** I wanted to start over, yes: [_reculer pour mieux
sauter_](http://www.merriam-
webster.com/dictionary/reculer%20pour%20mieux%20sauter). I had been going to
all these different arts events and I wanted to create a vehicle that would
better reflect the energy I was seeing all around me; so much is going on.
With a blog, I thought I could create a space that straddled formal reportage
and some informal banter; that created a forum in which I could experiment and
have fun, and hopefully share that with readers.

**NL:** Do you feel that via _PLEASURE_ you're able to engage in kinds of
cultural criticism and commentary that the mainstream media in Trinidad and
Tobago otherwise doesn't provide? And if they don't, why is that?

**AB:** Small media houses can only do so much with limited resources,
especially under the kinds of pressures which they are subjected to these
days.

The issue I have is with the very idea of reportage. With few exceptions, if
you look at a good feature in the local papers and a good feature in a foreign
newspaper, you will see certain similarities: a strong start, long sound
bites, lots of narration, colour, and analysis weaving the piece together into
a flowing, coherent whole. After a while you get the sense that if you've read
one good feature or interview, you've read them all; there is a style that
works and is adhered to, all over the world. If it ain't broke, don't fix it,
right?

The Internet allows you to break free from all that, to be as irreverent or
reverent as you want to be; to be informal and to experiment by doing things
that, perhaps, do not “work”.

This is what lies behind certain things on the blog, like the [artist
interview series](http://pleasurett.blogspot.com/2009/10/artist-interview-
series.html). There I aim to answer
[Foucault](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Michael_Foucault)‘s question of not
“who” but “what is the writer?”, by giving artists free rein to pretty much
say what they please, and to communicate directly with readers without
authorial intervention. I don't intervene in these interviews, I just let the
artists do all the talking. I think in some cases this has really worked well.
In the interviews, we've seen sides to people like the poet [Vahni
Capildeo](http://pleasurett.blogspot.com/2009/10/thisdiscoursehasnostartmiddlend.html)
and writer [Lisa Allen-
Agostini](http://pleasurett.blogspot.com/2009/12/thisdiscoursehasno-
startmiddlend_25.html) that I don't think we would have seen had the format
not been as free-rein.

**NL:** Were you inspired or influenced by any previously existing blogs?

**AB:** A friend introduced me to the website for a punky London publication
called [_The Pix_](http://thepixzine.co.uk/) which I quite liked
(unfortunately the site has since been taken down and is being redesigned). I
also encountered a very simple arts website for the [Centre for 3-Dimensional
Literature](http://www.3dlit.org/) and other arts blogs like [Paramaribo
SPAN](http://paramaribospan.blogspot.com/) and
[_Town_](http://cometotown.org), which really brought home for me the
potential of engaging in arts discourse online.

**NL:** Have you ever got a lead for a story or a piece of key information
from a Trinidadian blogger or other citizen journalist?

**AB:** Most certainly, yes. The Internet (with sites like Facebook and
Twitter) forms one of the richest sources of tips and information for the
modern reporter. If you're serious, you cannot afford to ignore it.

**NL:** Very few other professional journalists in Trinidad and Tobago have
their own blogs. None of the newspapers has a blog, though [one of
them](http://twitter.com/TriniGuardian) uses Twitter to share headlines. Do
you think the print media here understand the possibilities and implications
of citizen media and online social media in general?

**AB:** Blogs require time and resources. Even if their potential as gateways
to a global audience/market is really understood, I guess it’s really the
short-term bottom line that appears to factors in, unfortunately. Which is
fair enough if you're struggling to survive amidst an increasingly challenging
environment. It's striking, I think, that [all](http://newsday.co.tt/)
[three](http://www.trinidadexpress.com/) [dailies](http://guardian.co.tt/)
actually have websites in the first place. And I don't think it's going to be
too long before things like news blogs happen. For instance, the journalist
Afra Raymond has [a very insightful blog](http://afraraymond.wordpress.com/)
on current affairs where he does a lot of explanatory reporting.

**NL:** Is it really so striking that in 2010 the three daily papers in
Trinidad and Tobago have websites? What's more striking to me is how little
use they make of their web presences, how static the sites are.

**AB:** Well, yes and no. I guess it's the same as I mentioned above: a
question of resources and perceived potential revenue from what is already a
relatively small (but growing) online market. In that context, we're lucky
there are sites at all! Still it's true, there's a long way to go, and there
is a global potential that has not yet been fully tapped into.

**NL:** As a professional journalist, you've been subject to what many see as
an attempt at official suppression. Do you feel the situation in Trinidad and
Tobago regarding press freedom, freedom of expression, etc., is tightening?
What role might bloggers, Facebook users, Twitter users and others play in
this situation?

**AB:** The situation has been tightening for a while now, and through
successive government administrations. At the same time, the media is, on the
surface, expanding, and therefore, in theory, becoming more of a threat to the
powerful. So that journalists in this country are going to inevitably find
themselves under attack.

At the same time bloggers/twitterers et al stand at the gates; they are at the
forefront of what is, right now, the ultimate tool for free expression. Look
at what happened in the wake of the earthquake in Haiti — the first images we
had which really gave us a true idea of the terrifying extent of what had
happened and is still happening there [spread on
Twitter](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2010/01/13/in-aftermath-of-earthquake-
eyewitness-tweets-from-haiti/) and Facebook. The online community can reach
millions. And more importantly, it can escape the machinations of those whose
interests are served by silence.

But this is about to change. The next decade will see bloggers’ freedoms come
increasingly under fire via tools such as threats of court action. And the
Internet itself will become more heavily regulated by the state, and will be
further used to increase state-sanctioned invasions of privacy. For now,
though, the Internet is the best expression of that semblance of democracy
that remains in our societies.

