Over the past few weeks, Costa Rica has been bombarded with political
advertisements due to the proximity of the presidential election, which will
be held on Sunday, February 7th, 2010. Because of this, the presidential
candidates have been doing everything possible to attract more supporters with
the main goal of winning the election. In response to this overload of media,
the Costa Rican bloggers have been giving their opinions on the ads from the
political parties, some of which have been featured
[here](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2010/02/03/costa-rica-online-videos-add-
humor-to-presidential-elections).

This phenomenon began when candidate Luis Fishman of the Social Christian
Unity Party (PUSC), also known as “the lesser evil,” released an [ad
supporting pregnant women and their
children](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=18ttoGNlniQ&feature=player_embedded)
The women in the ad insult their husbands who left them alone with their
children, and which the candidate responded that he will help them with the
pensions that parents should give their children. The announcement was
described by ridiculous by some, as well as the blogger from _Hell in Costa
Rica [es]_ , who published the video of the ad and [wrote the
following](http://infierno.ticoblogger.com/2010/01/la-venganza-de-las-
embarazadas-el-menos.html):

> Saludos queridas almas: Les dejamos esta parodia del comercial de las
> embarazadas cantándole al menos malo. Disfrútenlo.

Hello dear souls: We leave you [this commercial
parody](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=18ttoGNlniQ) of pregnant women singing
to the lesser evil. Enjoy it.

The only female candidate, Laura Chinchilla of the National Liberation Party
(PLN), has released a [new
advertisement](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=gaD2bYyxaYg&feature=player_embedded)
about her trajectory from childhood to today, which seeks to demonstrate her
firmness and honesty to Costa Ricans. Cristian Cambronero of the blog _Fusil
de Chispas [es]_ [ also showed the ad and asked the opinion of his
readers](http://www.fusildechispas.com/2010/02/exclusivo-spot-de-cierre-de-la-
campana-de-laura-chinchilla), many of whom say the ad is too boring.
Cambronero provides his opinion:

> Ahora sí, mi opinión: un spot sencillo, más racional que emotivo,
> formalmente conservador (ha sido el tono a lo largo de toda la campaña). Al
> igual que en el caso de los del PAC, yo habría esperado algo más “festivo”,
> pero no le veo nada malo como para destruirlo solo porque sí.

In my opinion, it is a simple ad, more rational, than emotional, formally
conservative (which had been the tone throughout the campaign). As was the
case with PAC, I was expecting something more “festive,” but I don't see
anything wrong with it as to destroy it just because.

Finally, the candidate Ottón Solis of the Citizens Action Party (PAC) also
showed new ad in recent days, [inviting the youth to use their identification
cards for the first time by voting for
him](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=MVFL9ULLYKg&feature=player_embedded).
Solis has been trying to attract the votes of first time young voters and
those who voted for him in previous elections so that he does not remain “así”
(“like that” – in other words, not victorious). Once again, Cambronero of the
blog _Fusil de Chispas [es]_[published the ads, and asked opinions from his
readers. Rodrigo Garnier writes](http://www.fusildechispas.com/2010/02/nuevo-
spot-el-pac-se-juega-la-ultima-ficha/):

> Está bien trabajado. Ottón se ve y se siente algo diferente. Sin embargo el
> peso de lo hecho durante años anteriores y durante la campaña creo que no le
> alcanzarán, se quedará en “así”.

It is well done. Ottón looks and feels like something different. However, the
weight from what he has done in previous years and during the campaign, I
don't think will reach, he'll remain “like that.”

Although the party candidate Otto Guevara of the Libertarian Movement (ML)
[showed new ads](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=0CneEbuW5VI) and showed more
progress, according to society, he has seemed calmer than in previous
elections. This ad tries to convince Costa Rican families that a positive
change in the country means improving health care and education, but always in
opposition to the National Liberation Party.

Wednesday, February 3rd was the last day for political advertising and now all
candidates can do is wait.

