[![Image by thombo2 on flickr used according to CC
license](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2010/02/246938465_e2a8e36437-300x199.jpg)](http://www.flickr.com/photos/brucethomson/246938465/)

Image by thombo2 on flickr used according to CC license

The Costa Rican Presidential elections are this Sunday and through videos,
many Costa Ricans are expressing their concerns regarding the candidates and
the future of their country through parody and humor.

First, we have an online video uploaded by [El Basureo
,](http://elbasureo.blogspot.com/) where they propose an innovative solution
to the age old problem of not knowing whom to vote for. In this Costa Rican
election, out of the 6 candidates running for office, four of them are in the
lead: National Liberation's Laura Chinchilla, Libertarian Otto Guevara,
Socialdemocrat Otton Solis and Social Christian Luis Fishman. El Basureo
proposes a new machine which will mix and match characteristics of the
candidates, and the names that come off those mixes are a wink and nod to the
Costarican political situation.

Online video holds itself as a way to spread information and audiovisual
propaganda that is sometimes pulled from the television after a short airing
period. Such is the case with candidate [Fishman's campaign ad
](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=YjpidRIxcjY)which included grownups dressed
as a babies in diapers dancing and playing the piano , pregnant women and a
well recognized tune to the campaign's slogan “Fishman, the lesser evil”. It
has obviously spawned parodies, such as [this next
one](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=18ttoGNlniQ). The only thing which was
changed was the audio and subtitles, the rest of the ad was kept intact:

[LaErre.tv ](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=0qPAUdIOy4o)also came out with
their own take on the elections: The Presidential Candidate Kit, containing
everything you could need to launch yourself on a political career. With the
initial lines of : If you are tired of other politician's promises, and of
being sent to jail when you steal, why not become a candidate yourself and
take care of your problems? It goes on to explain the skills necessary, the
buzzwords you'll need and the perks you'll have once you acquire their kit and
follow the steps.

[Elchamukocr](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=kZgr2uhbMp8) also posts a video
making fun of Otton Solis, who during the campaign had to stop and ask for
donations to continue doing TV campaigns since his funds had run out. In the
video, Otton organizes a Teleotton drive to raise cash:

