Depending on how you measure the term “youth,” young people in India count for
roughly a few million more people than the population of the United States.
This generation dwarfs other age groups in its own country, too. The 315
million young people between the ages of 12-24 years makes up 30 percent of
India’s population.

For the most part, India’s youth of today are completely different from the
age groups of decades past. For one, the country these young people are
growing up in is an emerging superpower,
[says](http://www.businessweek.com/magazine/content/05_34/b3948401.htm)
BusinessWeek. Young people mirror that rising prominence. “This cohort is
healthier, more urbanized, and better educated than earlier generations,”
[writes](http://www.popcouncil.org/projects/TA_IndiaYouthSituationNeeds.html)
the US-based Population Council, a non-profit dealing with reproductive health
issues.

India’s youth are also increasingly willing to make their own decisions.
BusinessWeek
[reports](http://www.businessweek.com/magazine/content/05_34/b3948410.htm)
that 76 percent of India’s single women claim it should be them who decides
when they have a child. To [researchers](http://www.leslulu.com/womens-rights-
for-education/) and groups like Population Council, however, this confidence
may be masking deeper, more cultural reticence regarding reproductive health.
“These young people face significant risks related to sexual and reproductive
health, and many lack the knowledge and power they need to make informed
sexual and reproductive health choices,” Population Council reports.

**Information gap**

This information gap Ishita Chaudhry has been trying to fill since she began
the Youth Parliament in 2002,
[when](http://www.rhrealitycheck.org/blog/2009/04/01/reporting-sextech-
grassroots-gender-justice-and-peerbased-education) she was just 17. Also known
as the YP Foundation, the [internally-
acclaimed](http://www.rhrealitycheck.org/blog/2009/12/30/top-ten-wins-womens-
health-and-rights-2009) group designs and implements community-based youth
projects, providing funds for people between the ages of 13 through 28 years
to create projects [working
within](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Youth_Parliament) socio-cultural,
economic, legal and environmental issues. Some of the
[projects](http://www.theypfoundation.org/projects/) include voter ID
registration drives, peer programs for street children and publishing an
youth-oriented magazine.

One of the subjects the YP Foundation has naturally gravitated to, however, is
reproductive rights and sexuality. Issues like AIDS is especially problematic
for the world’s youth,
[reports](http://www.aegis.org/news/unaids/2009/UN091233.html) UNAIDS. The
Geneva-based organization says people worldwide between the ages of 12-24
years account for four of each ten new AIDS cases. Also, (mirroring findings
from Population Council, above) this age group has very little knowledge about
the disease and its transmission. That's not all. Young people are often “left
to fend for themselves,” regarding all aspects of sexuality and reproduction,
[said](http://blog.shantioc.org/2009/12/29/hiv-prevention-among-mostatrisk-
young-people.aspx?ref=rss) Dr Robert Carr, the Associate Director of the
International Council of AIDS Service Organizations.

**Using technology**

The internet is a natural choice to disseminate this information. “If you’re
looking at issues of sexually reproductive rights and health,” says Ishita
Chaudry, “then it becomes clear to provide a space where young people can
continue conversations once they’ve finished community based interactions and
workshops.” For the most part, that space is through technology, which works
well because so many of India’s youth are online. But also, the internet is a
good medium to provide this information because young people can read it on
their own time and, if they want, anonymously. In this video Ishita Sharma and
Ishita Chaudry speak about the YP Foundation’s online work.

**Project 19**

The internet may be a fine organizing tool, but the YP Foundation thrives to
create communities in the real world. One of the organization's major
initiatives is Project 19, which trains young people in New Delhi to become
peer facilitators to lead discussions and workshops on often hush-hush topics
like gender, sexuality, reproductive rights and HIV/AIDS.

In a post on the YP Foundation blog, Ishita Chaudry
[sums](http://theyouthparliament.blogspot.com/2009/02/project-19-festival-
what-it-meant-to-us.html) up some reasons the initiative got underway.

> Why as society, are we so scared to address any kind of sexuality education
> or rights cohesively? What stops us from giving people complete rather than
> half baked information that is critical and live saving and that can protect
> them from disease, empowers them to be informed individuals and that teach
> them to be respectful to their own needs and desires and to be respectful
> towards the rights of others as well?
>
> …We have had too many years of awkward silences and far too many generations
> of people who have grown up not being given the opportunity to speak out
> about their thoughts, fears, expressions and questions.

In conjunction with Project 19, the YP Foundation also organizes (with a
variety of other groups) the Project 19 Annual Festival, bringing over 600 at
risk and marginalized group and urban youth from around India to Delhi. These
young people, whose members range from truck drivers to sex workers, lobby and
discuss how to tackle issues ranging from collective rights to sexual
reproductive rights and health.

As the [Daily Indian](http://www.thedailyindian.com/delhi-to-celebrate-
sexuality-rights/) newspaper explains:

> Using various mediums like art, music, theatre and dance, the festival will
> provide a platform to the young men and women as well as the vulnerable
> groups to bring forth their experience-based opinion on different issues and
> form a network so as to solve some of the problems together.

