In a freezing winter at [International University of Japan
(IUJ)](https://www.iuj.ac.jp/), located in Niigata Prefecture of Japan, over
100 students from different countries joined together to build a snow ball in
lighting the candle of hope for Haitians who have been suffering from [the
earthquake devastation](https://globalvoicesonline.org/specialcoverage/haiti-
earthquake-2010/) since January 12th.

The snow candle event initiated by the IUJ's Global Concerns Forum and [the
Photography Club](http://iujphotographyclub.blogspot.com/) is the culmination
of the fund raising efforts which targeted approximately 100,000 YEN (US
Dollar 1,000) to contribute to Red Cross of Japan for Haiti Relief Effort.

All students representing their own country in IUJ were invited to build a
small igloo-type structure using snow balls and provide the candles necessary
to light them up in the letter shape of “HAITI.” Regardless of the cold
weather at 0 to 1 degree, students collaborated to build the snow ball so that
the candle light can be seen at the same time of sunset which makes a perfect
moment for a silent prayer.

The video below captures the Snow Candle Lighting event with messages from
students representing different countries. The common message of IUJ's
students is that: “Haitian people are not alone, the world is praying and
supporting you!”

  
**[HAITI Snow Candle](http://www.dailymotion.com/swf/xc2yo7)**  
 _by[Jusminesophia](http://www.dailymotion.com/Jusminesophia)_

Interestingly, students from a number of countries including Myanmar,
Indonesia, Philippines, and China expressed their deep sympathy for Haiti due
to the fact that these countries experienced much devastation from natural
disasters in recent years. Their message for Haitian victims is emotionally
and precisely clear: “During crisis, our countries got help from the world, it
is time that we turn our duty to help you.”

At the end of the event, students were holding each others hands surrounding
the Haiti Snow Candle showing international solidarity for the common cause:
Do not Give Up Haiti!

![Snow Ball under Sunset](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2010/01/IMG_8827-300x200.jpg)

Snow Ball under sunset

![HAITI Snow Candle](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2010/01/IMG_88731-300x200.jpg)

![HAITI Solidarity](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2010/01/IMG_88771-300x200.jpg)

HAITI Solidarity

