Dear All,

I am excited and honored to start the new year with this introduction of a new
project, [RuNet Echo,](../-/special/runet-echo/ "RuNet Echo") which was
launched by Global Voices at the end of 2009. For me, it all started with
[this exciting post](../2009/08/31/global-voices-seeks-staff-for-new-project-
interpreting-runet/ "this exciting post") and grew into a rewarding experience
of studying and analyzing one of the most complex and often misinterpreted
online communities in the world.

When we created this project, we took an ambitious and difficult role of
examining and analyzing Russian Internet (also called
[RuNet](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Runet)).

The project is long overdue. The Russian Internet community exploded in the
past few years and has become a platform where millions of people discuss
current issues in Russian politics, economic and social life. Russians are
[the most active users of social networks in the
world](http://www.comscore.com/Press_Events/Press_Releases/2009/7/Russia_has_World_s_Most_Engaged_Social_Networking_Audience
"the most active users of social networks in the world"), according to some
measures. There are more than [45 million
people](http://www.emarketer.com/Reports/All/Emarketer_2000629.aspx "45
million people") in the country with Internet access (a third of the whole
population) and around 4 million blogs. There are also 42 million registered
users of the most popular Russian social network,
[Vkontakte.ru](http://vkontakte.ru).

Those numbers are constantly increasing, making RuNet one of the fastest
growing Internet communities in the world.

Blogs seem to be the most popular online communication platform in Russia. A
mix of a conventional online diary and complex social networks with friends,
readers and different communities, blogs quickly became an interactive form of
media where a regular citizens can talk to politicians (including the
president of Russia himself), famous actors, prominent journalists, and
controversial historians, as well as an array of online communities.

Being largely uncensored and ever-present, blogs in Russia, like in many
countries of the world, have begun to compete with the heavily regulated
mainstream media. There are some examples of RuNet serving as a platform for
breaking news, and beating the conventional forms of media in immediacy and
accuracy (a tragic [night club fire](../2009/12/05/russia-online-forum-beats-
media-in-covering-night-club-fire/ "nigh club fire"), for example). Blogs and
social networks quickly have grown into a sphere where Russians enjoy the most
freedom and get the most information.

Our goal is to draw a large, comprehensive and live map of RuNet for global
audiences. We will regularly monitor the most interesting developments in the
Russian blogosphere, online media and social networking sites to create a
comprehensive and constantly updated source on RuNet. Drawing upon our
experience and understanding of Russian society, we hope to provide our
readers with exclusive content and analysis of the most important events on
RuNet. We plan to interview the most prominent Russian bloggers, along with
less-known but nonetheless interesting people who actively contribute to the
development of RuNet. The same goes for issues related to RuNet in general. We
will certainly pay attention to topics everyone is taking about but we will
also cover marginal subjects on the Russian Internet to present the full
spectrum of Russian online communities for global audiences.

We are currently working on creating a list of resources on RuNet that will
include notable academic works, books and online publications on the topic.
Our own rating of the most popular Russian blog posts is also on the way.

Our stories are also translated into Russian by
[Lingua](https://globalvoicesonline.org/lingua) translators and posted on a
[Global Voices in Russian](https://ru.globalvoicesonline.org/ "Global Voices
in Russian"). We will soon produce RuNet Echo page on LiveJournal.com (the
most popular blogging platform in Russia) and make our posts more readily
available to Russian bloggers. We're also sharing them on [our Twitter
feed](http://twitter.com/runetecho "our Tweeter feed"). We hope that the wide
availability of RuNet Echo stories in different languages and on different
platforms will create a productive discussion allowing us to improve our work.

I am honored to work with a wonderful and professional team of editors. They
have an enormous experience in reporting, research and analysis and they serve
as a great assurance that the project will become a valuable tool in
understanding Russian online communities.

[Veronica Khokhlova](../author/neeka/ "Veronica Khokhlova") is a GVO regional
editor for Central and Eastern Europe. She is doing a tremendous job covering
Russia and former Soviet republics and we are lucky to have her in our team of
editors.

[Alexey Sidorenko](../author/alexey-sidorenko/ "Alexey Sidorenko") worked at
the Carnegie Center in Moscow for several years. He is writing his PhD
dissertation for Moscow State University and getting a separate Master's
Degree at the Warsaw University in Poland.

[Gregory Asmolov](../author/gregory-asmolov/ "Gregory Asmolov") worked for
several prestigious newspapers in Moscow such as “Kommersant” and “Novaya
Gazeta.” He has also taught courses on new media and public diplomacy at the
Interdisciplinary Center Herzliya and the Open University of Israel.

RuNet Echo is designed as an interactive project. Our team is open to
suggestions from our readers. Please feel free to let us know what stories and
topics would you like to see on our pages and tell us how we can make our
project better.

