The [situation in Cusco, Peru remains
difficult](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2010/01/27/peru-heavy-rains-and-
mudslides-in-cusco/) because the rains have not ceased. However, that is not
the only problem the region faces. Amid [allegations and rumors
[es]](http://www.terra.cl/actualidad/index.cfm?id_cat=302&id_reg=1348525) that
tourists [es] [were charged money in order to be
rescued](http://elcomercio.pe/noticia/406108/pareja-chilena-denuncia-nos-
cobraron-300-dolares-subirnos-helicoptero-machu-picchu), which is something
that the authorities [have denied
[es]](http://www.log.pe/Nacional/20100127/525252.html), the Chilean government
sent a [Hercules aircraft
[es]](http://tele13.canal13.cl/noticias/nacional/12481.htm) on January 21 to
pick up Chilean citizens. There are photos of those rescued
[here](http://latercera.com/contenido/683_20388_7.shtml).

[![A flooded street in Huacarpay photo by Zenobio Valencia and used with
permission.](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2010/02/floods.jpg)](http://3.bp.blogspot.com/_DSzVy9f04zI/S1_QY0uWtdI/AAAAAAAADgw/lcy0_jtGlug/s1600-h/IMG_1323.JPG)

A flooded street in Huacarpay photo by Zenobio Valencia and used with
permission.

Other reports have surfaced in regards to [rising food prices
[es]](http://elcomercio.pe/noticia/405464/aguas-calientes-no-hay-comida-
botella-agua-cuesta10-galletas-6-gente-duerme-restaurantes) in the area of
Aguas Calientes, the gateway town to Machu Picchu. [The Attorney General
ordered an investigation
[es]](http://www.peru.com/noticias/portada20100128/78206/Fiscalia-verifica-
precios-de-alimentos-en-bodegas-y-restaurantes-de-Machu-Picchu) to verify and
act if it finds price speculation in the restaurants and stores.

As expected, the news soon appeared about the [complaints about a lack of
transparency [es]](http://www.cnr.org.pe/nueva_web/nota.shtml?x=2271) in the
distribution of aid to victims. Many are hoping that the government addresses
this issue.

In addition, there are concerns about the tourists who were hiking the [Inca
Trail](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Inca_Trail_to_Machu_Picchu) and in the
Sacred Valley, when the landslides started. It is estimated that at the time,
there were about [1,500 tourists in the area
[es]](http://criticadigital.com/index.php?secc=nota&nid=36645), but to date it
is not known whether all are safe. The total number of tourists in and around
Machu Picchu was estimated to be 2,000.

Twitterers have been posting information on what has been happening in and
around Cusco. Some of the tweets show the two sides of humanity:

[@harrygonzales](http://twitter.com/harrygonzales/status/8287344376):

> Sigue llegando el agua para ayudar a nuestros hermanos en la plaza de Armas
> #cusco http://tweetphoto.com/9723290

Water continues to arrive to the Armas Plaza to help our brothers and sisters
#cusco <http://tweetphoto.com/9723290>

[@harrygonzales](http://twitter.com/harrygonzales/status/8298583901):

> Los damnificados de Pisonay están en el centro recreacional de Calca
> http://tweetphoto.com/9742996 #Cusco

Those affected in Pisonay are now in the recreational center in Calca
<http://tweetphoto.com/9742996> #Cusco

Lynn Mora [@lynnmora](http://twitter.com/lynnmora/status/8325729522):

> En Cusco los scouts fueron enviados a las zonas de desastre para apoyar a
> damnificados.

In Cusco, the (boy) scouts were sent to the disaster area to help those
affected.

[@elcaminerito ](http://twitter.com/elcaminerito/status/8285731409)

> Nos avisan que existen ladrones que están saqueando en Huacarpay y Pisac,por
> favor los voluntarios vayan identificados, para evitar problemas

They tell us that there are thieves that are looting in Huacarpay and Pisac,
volunteers please identify them, please, to avoid problems.

Marco Moscoso has been regularly posting photos to his [Twitpic
account](http://twitpic.com/photos/markopunk), and he has been one of the
driving forces [behind the interactive map that shows the emergency areas
[es]](http://www.elcaminerito.com/2010/01/28/mapacusco/):

  
Ver [Cusco under
Emergency](http://maps.google.es/maps/ms?source=embed&hl=es&geocode=&ie=UTF8&hq=&hnear=Cusco,+Per%3F&t=h&msa=0&msid=109982467300164807545.00047e2feeab2ecbf50a8&ll=-13.469764,-72.000961&spn=0.267103,0.357056)
to see a larger map

In this [post](http://maytenandtheimpossibleproject.blogspot.com/2010/01/hoy-
en-huacarpay-today-in-huacarpay.html), the blog _Cambiando el Mundo [es/en]_
(Changing the World), one can find a list (in English) of the needs for
donated goods for the people of Huacarpay, a community that was drastically
affected by the floods.

There is also a Facebook group to collect help for Cusco: [A United Cusco
Against the Misfortune!!
[es]](http://www.facebook.com/event.php?eid=275339314741#/group.php?gid=274020371779)

Translation by Eduardo Ávila

