[![rio urubamba rage by Carlos Jose Rey of Living in Peru, used with
permission](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-content/uploads/2010/01/rio-
urubamba-rage-300x225.jpg)](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2010/01/rio-urubamba-rage.jpg)

rio urubamba rage by Carlos Jose Rey of Living in Peru, used with permission

The state of emergency the city of Cusco in Peru and surrounding areas has
moved many locals to make videos and upload them to the web, trying to get
mass media to pay attention to the drama lived by villagers throughout the
area who are now homeless, isolated and without food, water or electricity.

[Oscarpucha ](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=kQ1oPYv6pWc)uploaded a video he
took of the train ride returning from Machu Picchu: the train he was in was
the last one to depart from the sacred Inca city, before the rain, the rising
river levels and mudslides made it impossible to get more people out of the
Aguas Calientes village at the base of Machu Picchu and into Cusco. In the
video, you can see the foaming river that even splashes passengers as they
ride by.

Multimediantonio, who has also [uploaded plenty of footage
](http://www.youtube.com/user/multimediatonio)used in a regional Cusco
television channel, shows us [some of the damage
](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=JhZNzun1jnY)caused to the inside of a few
houses, where not only mud, but also raw sewage has covered the floors.

From Urubamba, a village near Cusco, [Mamaderodriguin posts a video
](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=FDSou6z3MGg)showing the overflowing river and
explains how it wiped out a recently inaugurated beach promenade. The
population is staying at a stadium for the meantime, but at the moment the
video was made, they had no tents to sleep in, and with the constant rains
these days and the rains that usually come during the month of February, they
will need shelter. You can see this next video and others regarding the
[damages in Urubamba ](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ybvepcLPUio)in his
[YouTube channel. ](http://www.youtube.com/user/MAMADERODRIGUIN)

In this next video, Zenobio Valencia talks to Mayten Sanchez in Cusco
discussing the amount of damage caused by the river in his neighboring village
of Huacarpay in Lucre. In the case of his village, most of the houses are
built traditionally out of adobe bricks and he esteems that about 98% of the
houses are either lost or will crumble down in the next few days. In his plea
for help he asks for blankets, non-perishable food items, water, items for
personal hygiene as well as tents. Ms. Sanchez mentions that she personally is
arranging for donation pickup as well as putting together a human team made up
of a doctor, two nurses, a geologist and a civil engineer. He also provided
images and pictures, [which Mayten uploaded on her
blog](http://maytenandtheimpossibleproject.blogspot.com/2010/01/urgent-call-
for-help-cusco-underwater.html), telling the story of the vast damage caused
by the river.

In Mayten's case, she is something of a pro at doing exactly this, and the
following video shows how she helped in the 2007 earthquake in Chincha, Peru,
arranging relief efforts during the aftermath such as teams of volunteers,
doctors, nurses and teachers who helped build and run soup kitchens, temporary
schools, houses, delivery of groceries to those who needed them, medical
services and other such services, some of which are still running and which
helped found the volunteer organization Mayten's House where they continue
providing services to the Chincha community, long after the media has ceased
to report on their situation after the earthquake. Following is the video [en]
telling the story of Mayten's House:

Mayten contacted us and asked us to please add the bank account information if
you are interested in making donations to help the people in Cusco. Global
Voices Online is in no way related to the Casa de Mayten efforts except in the
hope that they can provide aid to the people in the Peruvian South. If you
have any questions regarding donations, please contact Mayten at
[lacasademayten@gmail.com](mailto:lacasademayten@gmail.com) and she can give
you the information regarding the bank account.  

****

