[![My Camera by Marcin Wichary](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2010/01/2254456948_d51206e094_s.jpg)](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2010/01/2254456948_d51206e094_s.jpg)

My Camera by Marcin Wichary

Through citizen videos, different Colombian organizations share their unique
perspectives on crime, violence and armed conflict, where it's hard to tell
apart the good guys from the bad.

First, mothers and family members [show up to
march](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=4O1d04EmRxg) against the armed forces
impunity on the [deaths of young
men](http://www.diplomaticourier.org/kmitan/articleback.php?newsid=375) due to
what has been called False Positives. [In the latest false positive situation,
](http://www.cipcol.org/?p=842)it seems that military lured young men with
promises of work to rural areas where they were then assassinated and passed
off as guerrilla members killed in action. However, [the 17 accused members of
the military](http://www.semana.com/noticias-headlines/colombian-soldiers-
held-for-falsepositives-scandal-to-be-released/133435.aspx) were released when
the trial deadlines were not met.

The second group is the [Nasa indigenous
community](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=fQF9geMHDtM), who through their
[YouTube channel ](http://www.youtube.com/user/nasaacin)have the opportunity
to tell a side of the story usually avoided by mass media. In this case, the
mines, mortar shells and other weapons left on their indigenous preserve,
which is in the middle of the disputed areas between legal and illegal armed
groups. The indigenous security service has to frequently “sweep” the area,
including houses, to dispose of these weapons left by both the national army
and the guerrillas. In the video, they ask the armed forces to please stop
laying landmines and to at least come and pick up the unexploded ammunition
before the members of their indigenous community stumble upon them.

In this third example, [a neighborhood newspaper
](http://www.vivirenelpoblado.com/)interviews the police to ask for the end of
the year balance. [In the
interview](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=b6YfTiUnbZY), titled “Watch out for
the bad neighbor” the officer mentions an incident where members of a criminal
gang lived in a well-to-do apartment building much to the surprise of the
neighbors, smuggling out weapons inside duffel bags designed to transport
tennis raquets. But what is surprising is the recommendation the officer has
for anyone: keep an eye on your neighbors and if you see young men with lots
of money living on their own, eating out most of the time and bringing
attractive young women into their apartment, particularly if they look like
call girls, they might be members of the mafia.

Do you know of any other communities and organizations who are using video to
tell stories not covered by mass media or to share different perspectives on
the stories making the news? Please share them with us through the comments or
write me a note!

<http://www.flickr.com/photos/mwichary/> / [CC BY
2.0](http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0/)

