[![logo-450.png](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2010/01/logo-450.png)](https://transparency.globalvoicesonline.org/)

Internet technologies give governments an unprecedented
[ability](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/NSA_warrantless_surveillance_controversy)
to [monitor](http://www.i-times.org/interesting_times/2009/12/a-month-ago-
many-of-us-celebrated-the-20th-anniversary-of-the-fall-of-the-berlin-wall-in-
the-run-up-to-the-celebrations-a-ge.html) our communication, internet
activity, and [even the microphones on our cell
phones](http://news.zdnet.com/2100-1035_22-150467.html). The Internet,
however, also empowers citizens with new tools and tactics to hold their
elected officials accountable, increase transparency in government, and
promote broader and more diverse civic engagement.

[Rising Voices](https://rising.globalvoicesonline.org/), the outreach and
citizen media training initiative of [Global Voices
Online](https://globalvoicesonline.org/), has launched a new [interactive
website](https://transparency.globalvoicesonline.org/) and [global network of
researchers](https://transparency.globalvoicesonline.org/team) to map online
technology projects that aim to promote transparency, political
accountability, and civic engagement in Latin America, Sub-Saharan Africa,
Southeast Asia, South Asia, China, and Central & Eastern Europe. Over the next
three months [eight researchers and eight research
reviewers](https://transparency.globalvoicesonline.org/team) will document at
least 32 [case
studies](https://transparency.globalvoicesonline.org/projects/all) of the most
innovative technology for transparency projects outside of North America and
Western Europe. By thoroughly documenting and evaluating each project with a
standard methodology we aim to come to a better understanding of what tactics,
tools, and tips are most effective in 1) making government information
accessible to the general public in a meaningful way, 2) holding political and
corporate leaders accountable to the rule of law and their campaign promises,
and 3) promoting civic engagement so that a wider and more representative
portion of citizens are involved in policy making and political processes.

Over the next three months we hope to find concrete answers to the following
questions: Can technology for transparency projects be evaluated individually
for impact, or should they only be seen as part of a larger accountability
ecosystem? Does citizen participation in such projects lead to greater overall
citizen engagement and more widespread demand for accountable public
institutions? Do public institutions change their policies and behavior based
on the input from citizen-led initiatives? To what extent does the usage of
technology tools drive action around transparency?

### The Need

As of January 19, U.S. cellphone users have [donated more than $22 million in
text-message donations](http://www.washingtonpost.com/wp-
dyn/content/article/2010/01/18/AR2010011803792.html) alone. In fact, roughly
one-fifth of the $112 million total that the American Red Cross has so far
raised for Haiti has come via text messaging. Technology has clearly had an
impact on global giving for humanitarian relief efforts. The priority right
now is that the money gets to Haiti quickly and is spent as effectively as
possible to save lives, and provide medical care and shelter. But in the
longterm, as [billions of dollars of aid
money](http://www.guardian.co.uk/news/datablog/2010/jan/14/haiti-quake-aid-
pledges-country-donations) flow in to help rebuild infrastructure and entire
industries, how can both Haitian citizens and donors [hold institutions
accountable so that development programs are run
properly](http://marketplace.publicradio.org/display/web/2010/01/18/pm-camp-
crisis/) and without corruption?

As traditional media companies are forced to cut their budgets because of
falling advertising revenue, [investigative
journalism](http://www.onthemedia.org/transcripts/2008/08/15/01) and
[international coverage](http://www.csmonitor.com/2007/0207/p09s01-cojh.html)
are the two most common areas to be disappear. David Simon, in [his testimony
before Congress about the death of the newspaper
industry](http://www.onthemedia.org/transcripts/2009/05/08/01), said that with
a vacuum of investigative journalism, “it is going to be one of the great
times to be a corrupt politician.” Meanwhile, Transparency International's
2009 [Corruption Perceptions
Index](http://www.transparency.org/policy_research/surveys_indices/cpi/2009)
reveals that corruption is still a severe and worldwide problem.

However, there is also growing enthusiasm about [the use of social media as a
powerful tool in promoting transparency and fighting against
corruption](http://www.transparency.org/news_room/in_focus/2009/your_say_on_corruption).
But how does the use of technology to promote transparency differ across
regions, cultures, and types of governance? What skills and expertise are
missing from the current technology for transparency projects? What types of
relationships have they formed with media, government, and civil society
organizations to increase their impact? We will document in-depth as many
technology for transparency projects as possible to gain a better
understanding of their current impact, obstacles, and future potential.

### The Team

Global Voices has long been reporting about uses of digital media and
technology to [improve
governance](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2009/11/09/uganda-kenya-in-search-
of-e-governance/) and [fight against
corruption](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2010/01/08/a-global-look-at-anti-
corruption-day/). Several veteran Global Voices contributing authors are
joined by leading transparency activists around the world to make up our [team
of researchers and research
reviewers](https://transparency.globalvoicesonline.org/team). We are also
fortunate to count on the experience and insight of a board of advisors made
up of the [leading thinkers in the field of transparency and good
governance](https://transparency.globalvoicesonline.org/advisors).

For those of you on Twitter we have made lists of our
[researchers](http://twitter.com/techtransparent/researchers),
[reviewers](http://twitter.com/techtransparent/reviewers), and
[advisors](http://twitter.com/techtransparent/advisors).

### The Results

As of today you are able to read three case studies documenting projects based
in Jordan, Chile, and Kenya.
[Ishki.com](https://transparency.globalvoicesonline.org/project/ishki) is a
complaint brokerage which collects and organizes complaints from local
citizens about the public and private sector. [Vota
Inteligente](https://transparency.globalvoicesonline.org/project/vota-
inteligente) uses technology to provide Chilean citizens with more information
about their elected officials.
[Mzalendo](https://transparency.globalvoicesonline.org/project/mzalendo)
tracks the performance of Kenya's Parliament by documenting votes, publishing
records, and providing analysis and context.

Over the next two weeks these three case studies will be joined by eight
others. In addition to publishing at least 32 case studies over the next three
months, we will also facilitate 16 [discussions on Global
Voices](https://globalvoicesonline.org/-/special/transparency-technology-
network/) that provide more context and background information about the state
of transparency, accountability and civic engagement in specific countries and
regions. We are also building a
[toolset](https://transparency.globalvoicesonline.org/tools) of the most
effective tools used by the projects that we document. Click on any of the
tools and you will see which projects have incorporated it as part of their
strategy.

We realize that these are busy times and that few readers will be able to read
all of the thorough case studies, background discussions, and tool profiles
that we publish. For this reason we have created a weekly podcast that will
feature five-minute interviews with leaders of some of the most interesting
technology for transparency projects that we come across. You can [click on
this link](itpc://transparency.globalvoicesonline.org/podcast) to subscribe to
the podcast in iTunes. So far we have interviews with [Waheed Al-
Barghouthi](http://waheedbarghouthi.blogspot.com/) of Ishki, [Ory
Okolloh](http://www.kenyanpundit.com/) of Mzalendo, and [Felipe
Heusser](http://web.me.com/fheusser/Sitio_web_3/Home/Home.html) of Vota
Inteligente.

At the beginning of May we will also publish a traditional PDF report which
highlights the most innovative and effective tools and tactics related to
technology for transparency projects. The report will make recommendations to
funders, activists, NGOs, and government officials regarding the current
obstacles to effectively applying technology to improve transparency,
accountability, and civic engagement. It will also aggregate and evaluate the
best ideas and strategies to overcome those obstacles.

Our research will complement – and collaborate with – the work being done by
like-minded mapping, discussion, and toolset projects including
[ParticipateDB](http://participatedb.com/),
[Participedia](http://www.participedia.net/wiki/Welcome_to_Participedia), the
[International Association for Public Participation](http://www.iap2.org/),
the [National Coalition for Dialogue &
Deliberation](http://www.thataway.org/),
[ePractice](http://www.epractice.eu/), [MobileActive's
mDirectory](http://mobileactive.org/areaofpractice/Democratic+Participation),
and [LocalLabs](http://forums.e-democracy.org/groups/locallabs).

### How to Help

This is a collaborative research project which is open to the participation
and input of anyone interested in the intersection of technology and good
governance. If you have suggestions for case studies that we should document
and evaluate please get in touch via our [contact
page](https://transparency.globalvoicesonline.org/contact). If you are
interested in contributing as a volunteer researcher you can [register for a
user account](https://transparency.globalvoicesonline.org/user/register).

You can [subscribe to our RSS
feed](https://transparency.globalvoicesonline.org/projects/all/feed) for newly
published case studies and [ to our
podcast](itpc://transparency.globalvoicesonline.org/podcast) for interviews
with leading doers and thinkers in the field. Please [follow us on
Twitter](http://twitter.com/techtransparent) and [become a fan of our page on
Facebook](http://www.facebook.com/pages/Transparency-and-Technology-
Network/150090904970?ref=mf) to receive extra updates about daily news and
information related to technology for transparency. Finally, if you would like
to engage in debate and discussion about the application of technology to
improve governance in countries outside of North America and Western Europe,
please [subscribe to the Transparency for Technology mailing
list](http://groups.google.com/group/transparencynetwork).

For years now there has been an [ongoing
debate](http://bloggingheads.tv/diavlogs/21140?in=45:16&out=57:12) about
whether the Internet is good or bad for democracy. But we have few case
studies and even fewer comparative research mappings of Internet-based
projects that aim to improve governance, especially in countries outside of
North America and Western Europe. Hopefully the Technology for Transparency
Network will lead not only to more informed debate about the Internet's impact
on democracy, but also to more participation and interest in projects that aim
to empower and improve the livelihoods of citizens who were previously
excluded from political participation.

