**_This post is part of our special coverage[Indigenous
Rights](https://globalvoicesonline.org/specialcoverage/indigenous-rights/)._**

On Tuesday, January 12th, Kabyles, [the indigenous people of
Algeria](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Kabyle_people), marched in the country's
northeastern region of[ Kabylie](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Kabylie), ahead
of the celebration of [the Berber new
year](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Berber_calendar) (Yennayer), demanding more
autonomy from the central state. _[The Movement for the Autonomy in
Kabylie](http://mak.makabylie.info/)_ (MAK) organizing the protest explains
that what started as a peaceful march was rapidly confronted heavy handedly by
the authorities who imposed a media blackout. As the world's attention turned
to Haiti and the tragic aftermath of a horrendous earthquake, little news
about the protest appeared on mainstream media, prompting protesters and their
supporters to report on the Net.

The Kabylie region has a long history of confrontation with the Algerian
government, as indigenous demands evolved from calls for outright independence
from the central state to a recently proposed [plan of
autonomy](http://mak.makabylie.info/Projet-pour-l-autonomie-de-la) [Fr],
culminating in the year 2001 in what is known as the[ Black
Spring](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Black_Spring_\(Kabylie\)) when riots
broke out throughout the region leading to deadly confrontations between
protesters and the Algerian army.

_[Tilanum](http://www.youtube.com/user/Tilianum)_ posted this video on the
video sharing website _Youtube_ , allegedly showing a violent clash between
protesters chanting “Murderous Power!” and the security forces:

The event was followed by microbloggers like
_[Kabyle](http://twitter.com/kabyle)_ who tweeted the march and linked to
pictures of the demonstration:

[![Kabyle on Twitter](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2010/01/Kabyle-on-
Twitter-300x180.jpg)](http://twitter.com/kabyle/status/7670784020)

Victorious march of the MAK in Kabylie: more than 10,000 people in the street.

_Saiduali_ blogging on _Le Portail des Hommes Libres_ [Fr] [posted
pictures](http://aokas-aitsmail.forumactif.info/kabylie-news-f11/marche-du-
mak-bgayet-12-01-2010-t3037-45.htm) of a march that took place in the coastal
city of Bejaia:  
![Bejaia Marchers](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2010/01/Bejaia-Marchers-300x225.jpg)  
![Bejaia Marchers](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2010/01/Bejaia-Marchers-2-300x225.jpg)  
![Bejaia Marchers](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2010/01/Bejaia-Marchers-3-300x225.jpg)

On the social networking website Facebook, [a
group](http://www.facebook.com/pages/Mouvement-pour-lautonomie-de-la-Kabylie-
MAK/133627480241) [Fr] was created attracting over 800 members and bringing
together supporters and opponents of the autonomy in Kabylie. _[Lee
Loo](http://www.facebook.com/lisa.snoopy?ref=mf)_ comments on the group Wall
explaining that although she's a Berber herself, she opposes autonomy. She
writes:

> Vous nous faites honte. Je suis Amazigh mais mon pays reste l'algérie […]
> Vous n'avez aucune chance, alors là zero chance […] Tout le reste des
> Kabyles sont contre çà!

You bring us shame. I am Amazigh but my country is Algeria. You have no chance
whatsoever in achieving this. All the rest of Kabyles are against it.

_Allas Di Tlelli_ , blogging on _Kabyles.net_ [Fr] [contradicts
](http://www.kabyles.net/Petit-debat-de-rue-sur-l-autonomie,05021.html)that
claim. He writes:

> [L]es forces existantes en Kabylie sont, plus ou moins, acquises pour
> l’autonomie de la Kabylie avec une différence d’approche qui relève beaucoup
> plus de l’idéologie politique.

The existing forces in Kabylie are generally supportive of the autonomy, with
the difference of approach having much to do with political ideology.

These events come with the backdrop of recent moves by neighboring Morocco to
grant its Amazigh population more rights (indigenous languages are being
taught in school and a [Berber language TV
channel](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2010/01/07/morocco-first-indigenous-
tv-channel-launched/) has recently been launched), in addition to a broader
plan that will bring, the Moroccan authorities claim, more autonomy to
different regions including the contested territory of Western Sahara.

**_This post is part of our special coverage[Indigenous
Rights](https://globalvoicesonline.org/specialcoverage/indigenous-rights/)._**

