Here are some maps that humanitarian aid responders are using to communicate
the evolving situation in Haiti’s earthquake zone. Nearly a week after the
disaster — and aftershocks equal to major temblors — the maps and satellite
imagery are proving some of the most reliable information available.

The [Ushahidi Network](http://haiti.ushahidi.com/reports) has created [a very
detailed interactive map](http://haiti.ushahidi.com/) overlaying information
on threats, people needing assistance, medical care, food and other aid
availability by type. The map is being updated as information is received via
the Ushahidi network, Twitter and Web form. Ushahidi's Erik Hersman, in an
email message, said the system was processing mostly web and Twitter
communication in the first days after the quake, because cell networks were
down in much of southern Haiti. That's changing and cell service, which is
more widely distributed, “is bringing in a lot more reports.”

[Crisis Commons](http://haiti.casefoundation.org/), a network of technology
professionals that creates tools for humanitarian relief response, has
[announced](http://haiti.casefoundation.org/) that it has undertaken a similar
project to [map relief efforts](http://haiti.casefoundation.org/NGOMapping)
and to generate a [crisis-specific baseline
map](http://haiti.casefoundation.org/) of Haiti’s capital, Port-au-Prince, for
relief agencies to use as planning reference. The project has just begun.

In New York City, the New York Public Library has a series of [maps
online](http://maps.nypl.org/relief/maps/70) showing camps where survivors are
finding shelter. A second set identifies [damaged areas and
buildings](http://maps.nypl.org/relief/maps/69). They are being edited and
updated.

Most other imagery is not interactive, but arguably gives a broader overview
of the situation. [This
image](http://www.zki.dlr.de/media/download/applications/2010/haiti/DLR_20100113_haiti_earthquake_population_low.jpg)
from the [Center for Satellite Based Crisis
Information](http://www.zki.dlr.de/applications/2006/lebanon/lebanon_2006_en.html)
measures distances from the quake’s epicenter to where people lived in
southern Haiti pre-quake. It’s color-coded to reflect population density.

According to the map, the Hatian state of Leogane, though it has not been
identified by name in many news reports, was the quake’s epicenter, and
contains several heavily-populated areas. Carrefour, a large suburb of Port-
au-Prince, is on Leogane state's border. The city of Jacmel, on the coast, is
also in Leogane and badly damaged. As of late yesterday, broken roads and
bridges were still cutting off the area, which is closer to the epicenter than
Port au Prince is, from receiving aid.

The US Geological Survey has put information into [a very easy to read chart](
http://earthquake.usgs.gov/earthquakes/pager/events/us/2010rja6/index.html   )
of cities by population, color-coded by the quake’s intensity. The result is a
very fast way to understand just how many people were living in the places hit
hardest by the disaster. USGS has also posted a map of [the earthquake reports
it has received by
phone](http://earthquake.usgs.gov/earthquakes/dyfi/events/us/2010rja6/us/index.html).
It shows perceptions from people phoning the USGS to tell them what they saw.

The NYTimes has created a[ three-dimensional map ](
http://www.nytimes.com/imagepages/2010/01/15/world/americas/15haitimap.html?src=tp
)that is extremely useful for understanding where Port-au-Prince lies in
relation to Haiti’s geology. It shows the city in a coastal plan at the foot
of a range of mountains that complicate aid delivery. The Times’ map also
explains very clearly the location of several neighborhoods where medical aid
and food distribution has begun, and shelter has become haltingly available.

Direct satellite imagery is available
[here](http://www.zki.dlr.de/applications/2010/haiti/182_en.html). Orbital
images taken as recently as yesterday are being compared to images of Port-au-
Prince and the environs before the quake, like [this
one](http://www.zki.dlr.de/media/download/applications/2010/haiti/DLR_20100114_haiti_earthquake_port-
au-prince_detail_overview_medium.jpg).

The satellite view can determine damage and needs in areas that still do not
have reliable communication. In theory, night imagery should be able to tell
us something similar about electricity, the availability of light, and perhaps
fuel. But if those images are in use, they haven’t been made public yet.

For more on the earthquake in Haiti, visit our [Special Coverage
page](../specialcoverage/haiti-earthquake-2010/).

_The thumbnail image used in this post,[Day 15 – Small
World](http://www.flickr.com/photos/kylebaker/4278475330/), is by kylebaker,
used under [a Creative Commons
license](http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/2.0/deed.en). [Visit
kylebaker's flickr photostream](http://www.flickr.com/photos/kylebaker/)._

