Through the dire conditions in Haiti after the 7.0 Earthquake on January 12th,
on ground level people have been helping others selflessly: whether it is
picking survivors from under the rubble with their bare hands, providing
shelter to those in need, giving medical assistance or by giving much sought
after information of what the situation is like through blogs, twitter,
cellphone messages or video.

In Les Cayes, Louis St. Germain from the Global Orphan Project has been
recording videos and sending them off to be posted in YouTube or for major
news outlets. While most of the eyes are focused on the devastation of Port Au
Prince, the nation's capital,[ he provides a different perspective from the
South of Haiti](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=z0r2dPLoSxU), which also
suffered greatly due to the Earthquake:

At the Film school [Cine Insitute](http://www.cineinstitute.com/news/) in
Jacmel, students and staff have also rallied and have been reporting and
making videos to [upload online
](http://www.vimeo.com/user1630305/videos/sort:date)depicting the destruction
and needs the people of Jacmel are facing. This next video is by [Fritzner
Simeus](http://www.vimeo.com/8769046):

This next video, [Priere by Manassena Cesar](http://vimeo.com/8779846), also
from Cine Institute, shows a prayer for all those suffering the quakes
aftermath:

Although [PierreCote](http://ustre.am/3al7), is in Canada, through [an online
video channel](http://ustre.am/3al7) and a[ twitter
account](http://twitter.com/pierrecote) he has been moving quickly and
constantly to provide information, enlist the aid of translators to publish
the information in French, Spanish and English and interview people in Haiti,
who during different moments of the day have been giving first-hand
information and testimonies as well as requests for help in aiding their
relief efforts on the ground.

Such is this morning's example: to keep the Internet networks up and running
in Haiti, [Paolo Chilosi, general manager of Multilink (internet network) in
Haiti](http://twitter.com/pierrecote/status/7833127401) requested through a
Skype Call a [Sr. Cisco System
Engineer](http://twitter.com/pierrecote/status/7833025424) to go to Haiti for
four days to help rebuild the network and keep it up. Following, [the clip
made](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=iiAViJjAJaE) from the live show and
uploaded to YouTube:

Do you know of any other citizen journalists covering events in Haiti? Please
share this information in the comments and if possible also on your social
networks so that their efforts don't go unnoticed. Thank you.

For more information on the earthquake in Haiti, click on our [Special
Coverage page](https://globalvoicesonline.org/specialcoverage/haiti-
earthquake-2010/).

