Have something you want Japanese Prime Minister Yukio Hatoyama to know? You
could try tweeting about it to
[@hatoyamayukio](http://twitter.com/hatoyamayukio)!

[![@hatoyamayukio](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2010/01/hatoyamayukiotwitter.jpg)](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2010/01/09/japan-
pm-hatoyama-starts-twitter-and-blogging/hatoyamayukiotwitter/)

@hatoyamayukio

_All links in this post link to Japanese content unless otherwise noted._

The Prime Minister started using Twitter during the new year holidays as a
means to “bring politics to the people”, in addition to the existing [Kantei
TV](http://kantei.channel.yahoo.co.jp/) and a [mailing
list](http://www.hatoyama.gr.jp/mg/index.html). He also has a new blog called
[Hato Cafe](http://hatocafe.kantei.go.jp/) (鳩Cafe or “Pigeon Cafe”).

Following some confusion with [a fake Twitter
account](http://asiajin.com/blog/2009/12/26/spoofing-pm-tweets-causes-
confusion-the-cabinet-office-to-move-up-the-day-of-real-account-launch/) [en],
[his first tweet](http://twitter.com/hatoyamayukio/status/7254972447) was sent
on Dec 31st, 2009 5:49 PM.

>
> みなさん、あけましておめでとうございます。今年もよろしくお願いいたします。今日からツイッターとブログ「鳩cafe」を始めました。http://bit.ly/7OSH1o
> ご感想など@hatoyamayukioへお寄せください。馴れるまでは１日１ツイートが目標です。

Happy New Year, everyone! Best wishes to all in the coming year. Starting
today, I have begun my Twitter and blog Hatocafe. Please send your thoughts
and impressions to @hatoyamayukio. http://bit.ly/7OSH1o I am aiming to do one
tweet a day until I get used to this.

(The translation above is quoted from
[@hatoyama_y_en](http://twitter.com/hatoyama_y_en), which is run by
translation service [MyGengo](http://mygengo.com/).)

The initiative is the brain child of the “Civilian Working Group to Shorten
the Distance between Citizens and Politics” (国民と政治の距離を近づけるための民間ワーキンググループ).
Members include playwright [Oriza
Hirata](http://www.seinendan.org/eng/oriza/oriza.html), blogger and art
director [Naoyuki Sato](), CEO of eWoman, Inc. [Kaori
Sasaki](http://www.kaorisasaki.com/), and art director [Yuji
Tokuda](http://www.canaria-world.com/en/index.html). Tokuda also designed the
blog.

@hatoyamayukio's follower count is growing steadily, and is around 139,000 as
of January 9th.

**Is it really him?**

This was the focus of discussion for the first few days and the very first
issue that @hatoyamayukio addressed by clarifying that the PM sends a draft of
his tweets by e-mail to his secretary, who posts it to Twitter.

This disappointed many people, as voiced by [Makoto
Chikazoe](http://popup777.net/archives/5432/):

>
> 「基本的に私が書いています」と言いつつ、結局スタッフの意見を聞いて秘書官が投稿しているのだ。多くのTwitterユーザーが期待していたのは「首相の生の声」である。しかし、実際には何人もの人を経由した首相の声なのだ。これでは結局Twitterである意味はなく、従来通りの記者会見をテレビや新聞でチェックすればよいだけだ。

The Prime Minister says “Basically I write the tweets” but actually, it's his
secretary that's posting the tweets after discussing the content with their
staff. Many Twitter users were looking forward to hearing the “real voice of
the PM”. What we're receiving is the voice of the PM filtered through many
people, which makes using Twitter pointless since this is already available
through traditional press conferences, television, and newspapers.

[Akky from Ajiajin](http://asiajin.com/blog/2010/01/04/japanese-government-
has-to-learn-internet-and-domain-system/) [en] has a different opinion:

> Although many internet users expressed their disappointment to it, I
> personally don’t think that prime minister himself/herself should tweet on
> their mobile gears. It is reasonable as well as US president Obama never
> used Twitter.

**Is he really reading our tweets?**

Obviously, this was the next big question. The answer? Perhaps.

>
> 私がみなさんをフォローしていることについて「本当に読んでいるのか」「そんなにフォローできませんよね」などご指摘を頂きました。確かに全てのコメントは読めませんが、執務室のモニターにみなさんのコメントを常時表示し、それを読んで少しでもみなさんの生の声を知りたいと思っています。

I've received comments about me following all of you, such as, “Are you really
reading this?” and “Can you follow this many people?” I certainly cannot read
everything, but the monitor in my office regularly displays your comments. And
by reading them, I hope to hear as many of your voices as possible.

(Again, the translation is from
[@hatoyama_y_en](http://twitter.com/hatoyama_y_en).)

[![Hato Cafe](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2010/01/hatoyamablog.jpg)](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2010/01/09/japan-
pm-hatoyama-starts-twitter-and-blogging/hatoyamablog/)

Hato Cafe

**Follow back**

@hatoyamayukio will follow everyone who follows him. This is called _follow-
gaeshi_ (フォロー返し, literally “follow back”), an action that is considered by
many in the Japanese twittersphere to be good etiquette.

The Japanese official site guide twitnavi published a post titled “[Please
wait a while longer to be followed by Prime Minister
Hatoyama”](http://twinavi.jp/posts/detail/594) on January 2nd, explaining that
there is a limit on the system's side.

**Tweets for @hatoyamayukio**

@hatoyamayukio hasn't replied to anyone (yet?) but the editorial desk at
Mainichi Shimbun
[@mainichijpedit](http://twitter.com/mainichijpedit/status/7440566381) is
hopeful:

> @HatoyamaYukio 総理！「Twitterの女王」こと歌手の広瀬香美 @kohmi
> さんとの勉強会にご参加いただけないでしょうか？毎週水曜日に一緒に政治や経済の勉強をしています。ご検討ください！ #kokkokokko

@hatoyamayukio Prime Minister! Will you participate in a study session with
the singer Kohmi Hirose @kohmi aka “Queen of Twitter”? We get together every
Wednesday to study politics and economics. Please give this a thought!
#kokkokokko

[@yamachan_run](http://twitter.com/yamachan_run/statuses/7368342987) recently
started Twitter:

> @hatoyamayukio首相が始めたことがきっかけで、ツイッターに登録してみました。
> 首相がブログ・ツイッターをどのように使いこなして見せるのかすごく気になります。

@hatoyamayukio I registered with Twitter because you started tweeting. I'm
really interested to see how you will leverage your blog and Twitter.

**Comments from blogger Satonao**

One of the signs that the Prime Minster was going to dip his toes into social
media came when blogger Naoyuki Sato, better known as Satonao, was invited to
have dinner with him. Curious, we
[posted](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2009/10/08/japan-a-blogger-has-dinner-
with-prime-minister-hatoyama/) [en] about the seemingly random event last
October.

At that time, Satonao
[reported](http://www.satonao.com/archives/2009/09/post_2718.html):

> 鳩山さんは Twitter
> 自体を知らなかったようだけど、とても素直に耳を傾けてくれた（どんな話題にも辛抱強く丁寧に相手の目を見て耳を傾ける人だった）。でもまぁなんというか、Twitter
> を理解してもらうことの難しさよ（笑）

It seemed like Hatoyama-san hadn't heard of Twitter but he listened to me
speak very intently. (He was someone who listens politely and patiently,
regardless of the subject, while looking straight at the speaker's eyes.) Oh
but Twitter is so difficult to explain! (laugh)

>
> 書き込む姿を見てもらったり、ボクの実況へのみなさんの返信をパソコン画面で見てもらったり（熱心に読んでくれた）、いろいろしているうちにかなり興味はもっていただけた模様。殺し文句は「オバマも使っています！」（笑）。始めてくれるかどうかは全くわからないが、スタートラインには立ってくれたようである。閉じた世界が急にオープンになるのは無理だろう。まずは第一歩。少しずつ。少しずつ。

The Prime Minister watched me tweet and read everyone's replies to them. I
think he became really interested as I showed him different things. My killer
line was “Obama uses it, too!” (laugh) It's impossible for a closed world to
open up in an instant. Take one step at first. Slowly. Slowly.

