[![An Oslo street after the explosion](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2011/07/oslo_after_explosion-375x250.jpg)](http://www.flickr.com/photos/ohait/5966731302/in/photostream)

An Oslo street the day after the explosion, by Francesco Rivetti on July 23,
2011 shared on Flickr (CC-BY-NC-SA)

On Friday 22 July, 2011, at 3:26 PM an explosion in Oslo, Norway killed seven
people and caused extensive damage to several government buildings. The terror
continued only few hours later when a man masquerading as a police officer
opened fire on participants at a [Labour Party Youth (AUF)
camp](http://auf.no/-/page/show/utoya?sandbox_id=1063610) [no] on the island
[Utøya](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ut%C3%B8ya). At least 85 people were
murdered on the island before the shooter was apprehended by police and
identified as a 32-year old Norwegian man named [Anders Behring
Breivik](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Anders_Behring_Breivik).

Breivik's [Facebook page](http://publicintelligence.net/wp-
content/uploads/2011/07/FireShot-capture-020-Anders-Behring-Breivik-nb-
no_facebook_com_people_Anders-Behring-Breivik_100002651290254.png) was quickly
discovered (now offline) as was [a single Twitter
message](https://twitter.com/#!/AndersBBreivik) he posted on 17 July. Bloggers
and journalists in Norway and abroad have continued to look for any trace of
the man online that could help explain his unfathomable actions.

**Searching for clues to a motive**

On Saturday, a blogger named Kevin Slaughter
([@kevinslaughter](https://twitter.com/#!/kevinislaughter)) in the United
States[ found a 1,514 page
manifesto](http://www.kevinislaughter.com/2011/anders-behring-
breivik-2083-a-european-declaration-of-independence-manifesto/) and a
12-minute [video](http://www.liveleak.com/view?i=093_1311453213) that appeared
to be by Breivik although it was published in English under the pen name
“Andrew Berwick”. It's a rambling tirade against “cultural-Marxists” and the
“Islamisation of Europe” and it offers advice for would-be terrorists.
Norwegian media [have confirmed
](http://www.tv2.no/nyheter/innenriks/gjerningsmannen-la-ut-video-og-manifest-
paa-nettet-3545104.html)that the document and video were uploaded by Breivik
on the same day of the attacks.

While the document can hardly be considered recommended reading, intense
curiosity about the identity of the killer, has turned it into a popular topic
of discussion.

On Twitter, conversations about the document can now be found on the hashtag
[#N2083 ](https://twitter.com/#!/search/%23N2083)which is a reference to its
title, “2083: A European Declaration of Independence.”

Blake Hounshell ([@blakehounshell](https://twitter.com/#!/blakehounshell)) the
managing editor of [Foreign Policy Magazine](http://www.foreignpolicy.com/)
live-tweeted quotes from the manifesto as he read through it on Saturday.

>
> [@blakehounshell](https://twitter.com/#!/blakehounshell/status/94873303239495680):
> Author gamely concedes, “Being a Justiciar Knight is not for everyone.”

>
> [@blakehounshell](https://twitter.com/#!/blakehounshell/status/94873705041235968):
> “Appear politically correct or at least moderate, dress normally. Try to
> limit your rhetorical activities. Avoid excessive forum posting.”

>
> [@blakehoundshell](https://twitter.com/#!/blakehounshell/status/94874100337614848):
> Author recommends telling your friends/co-workers/family that you have
> started to play, say, World of Warcraft and want to focus on that.

Ignoring his own advice, Breivik did in fact make postings to online forums,
including to the Norwegian right-wing and anti-Muslim-immigration website
Document.no. His comments here [from 2009 and
2010](http://www.document.no/anders-behring-breivik/) [no] have been
[translated to English and
reposted](http://dougsaunders.net/2011/07/political-thinking-anders-behring-
breivik/) on the personal blog of Doug Saunders
([@DougSaunders](http://twitter.com/DougSaunders)), European bureau chief for
the Globe and Mail newspaper from Canada.

**As seen elsewhere**

On Sunday, the founder of Document.no [Hans
Rustad](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hans_Rustad) uncovered [that Breivik's
manifesto plagiarized entire
paragraphs](http://www.document.no/2011/07/behring-breivik-kopierte-una-
bomberen/) [no] from the manifesto of [Ted
Kaczynski](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ted_Kaczynski), also known as the
“Unabomber.” Kaczynski sent over a dozen mail bombs to universities and
airlines between 1978 and 1995, killing three people. Where Kaczynski wrote
“leftist,” Breivik has written “cultural Marxist” instead. Rustad writes that
he discovered this from an unnamed source who “studied the manifesto all
night, and “coincidentally noticed a likeness”. Responding to intense media
curiosity, Document.no have [distanced
themselves](http://www.document.no/2011/07/hvordan-kunne-han-slippe-under-
radaren/) [no] from Breivik, pointing to personal criticism of Rustad in the
manifesto, and also by highlighting that Breivik also posted to other online
forums like [Minerva](http://www.minervanett.no/2011/07/23/den-ufattelige-
ondskapen/) [no] and to the Swedish neo-Nazi site
[Nordisk.nu](http://nordisk.nu/) [se].

Previous postings from Breivik have also been spotted in the online gamer's
forum Eu.Battle.Net where players of [World of
Warcraft](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/World_of_Warcraft) and other online
multi-player games convene to discuss game matters. In one thread entitled
[“Attacker from Oslo a WoW
player??”](http://eu.battle.net/wow/en/forum/topic/2423043490) forum members
discuss if they have ever interacted with Breivik, and how his gaming history
is likely lead to negative media portrayals of videos games.

On the NY Times news blog, The Lede, Robert Mackey, posted several links to[
“Web Clues to a Supected Attacker's
Motives”](http://thelede.blogs.nytimes.com/2011/07/23/scouring-the-web-for-
clues-to-a-suspected-attackers-motives/) and [several citizen videos showing
the damage on the streets of
Oslo](http://thelede.blogs.nytimes.com/2011/07/22/video-of-oslo-explosion-
aftermath/).

