![Burj Dubai by Joi Ito - under Creative Commons
](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2010/01/4068036426_35b4c9e4a5_b-199x300.jpg)

Burj Dubai by Joi Ito – under Creative Commons

Dubai has pulled all the stops to signal the opening of the world's tallest
tower – [Burj Dubai](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Burj_Dubai). The 828 metre
(2,717 ft) supertall skyscraper in Dubai, United Arab Emirates, is being
opened with much fanfare despite the doom and gloom that has surrounded the
emirate's economy in recent weeks.

Tweets started drumming up the excitement since the early morning making [Burj
Dubai](http://twitter.com/#search?q=%22Burj%20Dubai%22%20OR%20Dubai) now a
trending topic on the social networking site – despite the change in the
skyscraper's name to Burj Khalifa. Burj means tower in Arabic, and Khalifa is
the name of the President of the UAE Shaikh Khalifa bin Zayed Al Nahyan.

Dubai's very own ruler Shaikh Mohammed bin Rashid Al Maktoom, who is also Vice
President and Prime Minister of the UAE and a _Twitter_ user, just
[wrote](http://twitter.com/HHShkMohd/status/7371551514):

![Shaikh Mohammed bin Rashid's Tweet ](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2010/01/Picture-7-300x165.png)

Shaikh Mohammed bin Rashid's Tweet

Neighbouring oil rich Abu Dhabi recently [bailed out
](http://www.reuters.com/article/idUSTRE5BD0D720091214)Dubai, which is
restructuring its loans – pumping $10 billion into the debt-struck emirate.
Indian [Thejas V R](http://twitter.com/vrthejas/status/7371897056) did not
miss out on this fact in his comment:

![bail out money ](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2010/01/Picture-5-300x136.png)

Away from the economic comments, Twitter users were in awe. [Forrest
Goodson](http://twitter.com/ABoyAndHisJeep/statuses/7372547215) comments:

![Picture 8](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2010/01/Picture-8-300x165.png)

And [Maram Sami ](http://twitter.com/ItsMaram/statuses/7372634056)says the
opening is amazing:

![amazing](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2010/01/Picture-9-300x108.png)

Twitter was also used to appeal to citizen journalists. [Abeer
MK](http://twitter.com/AbeerMK/statuses/7372627605) retweets CNN's plea for
photographs:

![cnn ](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2010/01/Picture-10-300x148.png)

Meanwhile, _Imra Solt_ posted pictures of the fireworks show during the
opening [here](http://imresolt.blogspot.com/2010/01/burj-khalifa-aka-burj-
dubai-fireworks.html).

Off to enjoy the rest of the opening show!

(Burj Dubai picture by _Joi Ito_ under [](<div
xmlns:cc=)<http://www.flickr.com/photos/joi/> / [CC BY
2.0](http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0/)“>Creative Commons)

