[![Fireworks by <a href='http://www.flickr.com/photos/tormel/4232625674/'
data-versionurl=](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2010/01/fireworkth-75x75.jpg)Tormel](http://www.flickr.com/photos/tormel/4232625674/)”
title=”fireworkth” width=”75″ height=”75″ class=”size-thumbnail wp-
image-114226″ />

Fireworks by [Tormel](http://www.flickr.com/photos/tormel/4232625674/)

Around the world, people celebrate the arrival of the New Year with certain
traditions. Tonight, through video we bring you some of the traditions and
rituals people follow to improve their luck, fortune or other details in their
life for the coming year.

[In Mexico](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=F2QV4GXJQZc), some people light
candles, incense and take herbal “baths” to bring good luck and good fortune
for the coming year.In the following video, merchants tell about the best
selling New Year's items such as the 7 herb mix, the New Year Good Luck pack
with candle, incense, prayer and holy water and then mention how sales have
been slow this year. Maybe they'll be lighting some candles for good luck
tonight.

Special meals are often traditional: [originating in Sandusky
Ohio](http://sanduskyhistory.blogspot.com/2006/12/new-years-pretzel.html),
some people will be partaking in the German New Year's Eve pretzel tradition.
Following,[ the video recipe](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=HFKWbj56KT0):

In Spain, there is the tradition of eating 12 grapes, one for each stroke of
midnight. In[ this video](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=C5Qit1ZDxGA) you'll
be able to see a family gathered around the table, with the 12 grapes set on
skewers as they try to discover the best technique for accomplishing the task
of eating one grape per second:

[This next family](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=QhfhaI_BsDU) has a slightly
different technique, setting them out in front of them as they tune in to the
12 strokes of midnight radio broadcast:

[This video from Peru ](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=qHi8oByouwc)shows the
Latin American tradition of running around the block with suitcases to
guarantee a new year with lots of travel:

In Moldova, Romania they have the [tradition of the straw
bear](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ZaShkH-dAmU), a dance [showing the birth
and resurrection](http://www.rri.ro/arh-art.shtml?lang=1&sec=8&art=8321) of
the seasons:

Joy of Ritual [has posted on her vlog
](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=GDWqj7S4ABg)some of her favorite New Years
traditions from all around the world:

For those who observed the New Year tonight, Happy New Year! What are the
traditions in your part of the world? Did you celebrate the New Year in a
special way? If yours wasn't tonight, when is it? Please feel free to share
this information throught the comments!

