The Canadian government supposedly released [an angry statement
](http://www.ec-
gc.ca/default.asp_lang=En_n=714D9AAE-1_news=C95709A4-2BD6-4245-B709-B9B2935CEE56)today,
denouncing a spoof that _supposedly_ made it as far as the [Wall Street
Journal](http://europe-
wsj.com/article/SB10001424052748704201404574590453176996032.html) claiming
that Canada had shifted its policy and would be agreeing to greenhouse gas
reduction targets and drafting a plan for a climate adaptation fund for
developing nations.

In fact, it looks like all of it is
_[phishy](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Phishing)_ , including the Wall Street
Journal article (note, the URL is _europe-wsj.com_ and the writer seems non-
existent). [According to Jason Linkins at _Huffington
Post_](http://www.huffingtonpost.com/2009/12/14/canada-gets-punkd-in-
cope_n_390992.html) the denouncement itself is also a spoof. Confusing things
further, it appears there is even [a third fake
release](http://www.huffingtonpost.com/2009/12/14/canada-gets-punkd-in-
cope_n_390992.html) that has been sent to apologize for the confusion, leaving
many people wondering what is real and what is not.

~~There's still no official confirmation of who is behind the prank, but it
closely resembles previous actions by~~ The organizers of the prank are [The
Yes Men](http://theyesmen.org/canada) who've earned global notoriety for
publicly humiliating corporations and governments, often by putting out false
statements in their name.

A spoof website called [_www.enviro-canada.ca_](http://www.enviro-canada.ca/)
explains Canada's new supposed policies.

![Spoof Canada website](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2009/12/Spoof-Canada-website-254x300.png)

Spoof Canada website

According to the fake denouncement, the Canadian government was especially
frustrated that the news of their change of heart had been met so positively
by developing nations at the United Nations [Climate Change Summit (COP15) in
Copenhagen](https://globalvoicesonline.org/specialcoverage/copenhagen-climate-
summit-2009/). They provided a link to a
[video](http://cop-15.org/news/view+news_newsid=12888.html) of an impassioned
statement by Margaret Matembe, MP and member of the Climate Committee of
Uganda (a non-existent person) with a fake Canadian official sitting by her
side. **UPDATE** : The true identity of the Ugandan delegate is [revealed in
this video](http://good-cop15.org).

Although the website where the video is posted _appears_ very official it has
a different URL ([cop-15.org](http://cop-15.org)) from the actual United
Nations website ([cop15.dk](http://www.cop15.dk/)). Whoever is behind the
spoof, is effectively playing on the disbelief that many activists already
feel at the failure of world leaders to take definitive action on climate
change.

![Ugandan delegate makes statement at COP15 press
briefing](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-content/uploads/2009/12/UN-Canada-
spoof-300x169.png)

A clever spoof â€“ fake Ugandan delegate makes impassioned statement

