The community of Dominican Republic said goodbye to [composer and musician
Luis “Terror” Días
[es]](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Luis_D%C3%ADas_\(Composer\)), who died in
Santo Domingo on December 8 of a heart attack and renal problems, [according
to Agencia Efe
[es]](http://www.google.com/hostednews/epa/article/ALeqM5jLEOV15XM0vOYJoxuYxu-9NhNY1Q).
To the late generations, it is possible that Días does not strike as a
familiar name, especially outside the Republic, where he was born. However,
the revolutionary youth of the 70s decade saw the rise of his songs: plain and
simple descriptions of the customs and sentiments of the Dominican people.

[![Photo by Reynaldo Brito. Used with
permission.](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-content/uploads/2009/12/luis-
dias-300x199.jpg)](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2009/12/luis-dias.jpg)

Photo by Reynaldo Brito. Used with permission.

The nickname of “Terror” referenced his ability to mix agressively diverse
rhythms, from rock and metal to merengue and dominican root songs, while
mantaining his musical sensibility. His lyrics, of soul-rending nature, became
a symbol of the fights and struggle of the 70s, reaching international impact.

The song “Obrero, toma mi mano”, that was recorded by protest music groups
such as Los Guaraguao (Venezuela) and Expresión Joven (República Dominicana),
was written by Días in 1974. That same year the song was presented on the
festival “[Siete Días Con El Pueblo
[es]](http://es.wikipedia.org/wiki/Siete_D%C3%ADas_con_el_Pueblo)“, celebrated
in Dominican Republic, featuring national and international artists like
Mercedes Sosa, Lucecita Benítez, Danny Rivera, Silvio Rodríguez and duet
Víctor Manuel and Ana Belén.

After the 70s decade, Días focused again on rhythms. In 1983 he wrote the song
that would make him one of the symbols of the Dominican carnaval: “Carnaval
(Baile en las Calles)”, a trascendental composition also known as one of the
choruses from Shakira's hit single [“Hips Don't
Lie](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hips_don%27t_lie)“.

An example of his music is “Las vampiras”, recorded by user
[Liberius](http://www.youtube.com/user/liberius) in a concert of 2006:

His legacy includes composing more than 700 melodies, being an influence on
artists such as Juan Luis Guerra and Fernando Villalona, as well as
contributing to Dominican rock, of which he is considered a founding father.

Blogger [Pedro Genaro [es]](http://www.pedrogenaro.com/2009/12/el-terror-no-
ha-muerto-na.html) sums up the sentiment of many Dominicans:

> Parafraseando la canción de Liborio del propio Luis Días (Luis Díaz
> Portorreal), el Terror sigue vivo, seguirá vivo porque su legado es enorme y
> de una calidad incuestionable. Igual que él, estoy en negación…el Terror
> sigue Vivo!

Paraphrasing the song “Liborio” of Luis Días (Luis Díaz Portorreal), Terror is
still alive, he will keep living because of his enormous legacy of an
unquestionable quality. Like him, I'm in denial… Terror is still alive!

Victor Manuel recalls [the presence of the Dominican Republic
[es]](http://villaisabelard.blogspot.com/2009/12/la-cultura-pierde-un-eslabon-
luis-diaz.html) in “Terror” songs:

> Los isabelinos tuvieron la oportunidad en una ocasión de verle en persona,
> pero mas lejos llego una composición suya que hablaba de una belleza única
> en nuestras costas “La Ensenada”, en el tema Marola interpretado por Sergio
> Vargas.

The people from [Villa Isabela](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Villa_Isabela)
had the opportunity to see him playing live once, but farther reach had a
composition he made about the unique beauty of our beaches “La Ensenada”, in
the song _Marola_ interpreted by Sergio Vargas.

User [otonielcolas](http://www.youtube.com/user/otonielcolas) shares an
emotive video of José Duluc (who played with Días in the rock band [Transporte
urbano [es]](http://es.wikipedia.org/wiki/Transporte_Urbano)) paying his final
respects to his friend with music:

Also, on the blog _Duarte 101_[reactions from the community on Facebook and
Twitter [es]](http://duarte101.com/2009/12/08/la-gente-habla-de-luis-dias/)
can be found.

Translated by [Issa
Villarreal](https://www.globalvoicesonline.org/author/issa-villarreal/)

