As the [Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation (APEC)
Summit](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/APEC_Russia_2012) of 2012 approaches, the
Russian maritime city of
[Vladivostok](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Vladivostok) is busy with its
preparations. Creative netizens meanwhile, have pointed out that the city
[does not have an official
flag](http://www.hrono.ru/heraldicum/flagi/subjects/towns/vladik.htm) [ru] for
the event. Often the authorities just use the [blue St. Andrew’s cross on a
red background](http://www.hrono.ru/heraldicum/flagi/images/jack1992.gif).
This is a flag typically used in the Russian Empire for all sea fortresses
since 1889.

Wondering how officials will greet the delegates from various countries, the
city's bloggers have suggested several possible ideas for a new flag. Yet what
started as a serious initiative, has since ended up as a political prank.

The first recommended version of the flag has a tiger in the middle – a symbol
of the city – with orange color symbolizing the dawn, a white seagull and a
blue sea.

[![Suggested flag of Vladivostok by Live Journal user
newsmaker_su](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-content/uploads/2011/06/flag-
vlad-700x495-375x265.png)](http://vladivostok.livejournal.com/3142497.html)

Suggested flag of Vladivostok by Live Journal user newsmaker_su

Another version slightly recalls the Ukrainian and American flags combined
(see below). The blue stripe stands for the sea, yellow for the beach, whilst
the 50 stars represent the 50 islands in the East Sea (Sea of Japan) near
Vladivostok, and the seahorse signifies the city's maritime influence with its
military, commercial, and fishing fleet.

[![Alternative flag of Vladivostok by LiveJournal user
churkinsky_most](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2011/06/000fdshb-375x249.jpg)](http://vladivostok.livejournal.com/3146568.html)

Alternative flag of Vladivostok by LiveJournal user churkinsky_most

User _zemlya25_ [called](http://vladivostok.livejournal.com/3146568.html) [ru]
this version the “United Beaches of the Seaside.” Another enthusiast went
further and suggested the following version of the flag:

[![Alternative version of Vladivostok flag by LiveJournal user
huivstakane](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2011/06/s640x480-375x281.jpg)](http://vladivostok.livejournal.com/3147121.html#cutid1)

Alternative version of Vladivostok flag by LiveJournal user huivstakane

In this effort the brown background stands for the filthy beaches and the sea:
the author claims that it is important to highlight the dirty maritime
identity of the city. The gray stripe symbolizes Vladivostok's filthy air and
the gas pipes which soon will be built. The black holes represent the
increased number of road potholes in the city, whilst the dead tiger and fish
are running away to the West in a used Japanese car.

Some people have pointed out the absurdity of the exercise; user _zairok_
[pointed out](http://vladivostok.livejournal.com/3140156.html) [ru] that as
well as not having a flag, “Vladivostok also does not have a subway, waterpark
and a curling team.”

Eventually this creative exercise, which tells a lot about Vladivostok's
netizens’ self-identity, ended with the following political statement, against
Russian Prime Minister Vladimir Putin:

[![Vladivostok flag by Live Journal user
chylym](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2011/06/00002qhy-375x261.jpg)](http://vladivostok.livejournal.com/3147884.html)

Vladivostok flag by Live Journal user chylym

