Japanese cuisine is rich in variety and it varies a great deal according to
the season and the region, and trying out food at various restaurants, so
called _tabearuki_ (食べ歩き), is a hobby shared by many people in Japan.

Uploading pictures of the delicacies to be had at a special or exotic
restaurant or even at a favorite noodle shop is also quite common.

[![Okonomiyaki, by Flickr id: Yohei
Yamashita](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2009/12/okonomiyaki2_Yohei-
Yamashita-300x225.jpg)](http://www.flickr.com/photos/monana7/3184199445/)

Okonomiyaki, by Flickr id: Yohei Yamashita

_Takezou Miyamoto Niten_ is passionate about noodles and on his blog, he
[reviewed](http://blogs.yahoo.co.jp/takezou_miyamoto_niten) 367 bowls of soba
(蕎麦 wheat noodles), 80 of udon (うどん, white tick noodle), 193 of Chinese
noodles (中華そばor ramen) and some sushi.

[![Handmade Udon, by Flickr id: Dr.
Colossus](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2009/12/handmadeudone_Dr.Colossus-300x199.jpg)](http://www.flickr.com/photos/28919802@N04/3825888662/)

Handmade Udon, by Flickr id: Dr. Colossus

Greenling, grunt, filefish, sand borer, saurel… a long
[list](http://cypselurus.exblog.jp/10874478/is) of fishes posted by blogger
_wnk_sho_ who [explains](http://cypselurus.exblog.jp/10874478/) [ja] the
characteristics of each exemplar with illustrative pictures.

[![Sushi,　by Flickr id: gbSk](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2009/12/sushi.jpg)](http://www.flickr.com/photos/gbsk/3637620969/)

Sushi, by Flickr id: gbSk

Flickr user _neco_ specializes in lunch boxes or _bento_ in Japanese, usually
composed of white rice with one or more side dishes. With the tag [bento nikki
](http://www.flickr.com/photos/allegro/tags/%E5%BC%81%E5%BD%93%E6%97%A5%E8%A8%98/)(弁当日記,
lunch boxes diary) dozens of yummy and colorful bentos are portrayed.

[![By Flickr id: neco](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2009/12/bento.jpg)](http://www.flickr.com/photos/allegro/3756631097/)

By Flickr id: neco

Blogs where internet users exchange recipes of Japanese and foreign dishes are
also numerous. [Recipe blog](http://www.recipe-blog.jp/list_rank_top.cgi  )
[ja], for example, is a community of bloggers who post detailed recipes of all
kind of culinary experiments with pictures included.

In late November, on the same day the popular Michelin guide was released,
another guide on Japanese food went [on sale
](http://news.walkerplus.com/2009/1003/3/ ) [ja] for the first time. It is the
printed version of [tabelog.com ](http://tabelog.com/)[ja], a website entirely
based on people`s recommendations and reviews of restaurants, both big and
small, throughout the country from Okinawa to Hokkaido.

[![Japanese Sweets, by Flickr id: bebot](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2009/12/wagashi-300x225.jpg)](http://www.flickr.com/photos/bebot/3910852271/)

Japanese Sweets, by Flickr id: bebot

