On November 16-18, the [Young Leaders Visitors Programme](http://ylvp.se/) of
the Swedish Institute hosted a meeting in Paris of 26 opinion leaders from
Egypt, Syria, Lebanon, Jordan, Palestine, Tunisia, Morocco, Algeria and Sweden
to mark the conclusion of a 3-week workshop to improve dialogue between
Sweden, the Middle East and North Africa.

_Global Voices in French_ attended the meeting, and below are links to some of
the reflections of participants during and after the eventful meeting. There
is also a [YLVP Flickr photostream](http://www.flickr.com/photos/ylvp/),
several [videos on
YouTube](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=UXkOOw6KaY0&feature=player_embedded).
And a #YLVP hashtag on Twitter [on
twitter](http://twitter.com/#search?q=%23ylvp).

Stockholm-based journalist and media researcher from Jordan, [Rami
Abdelrahman](http://ramiswall.blogspot.com/2009/11/reflecting-on-ylvp-and-
beyond.html), reflects on the program on a series of videos he uploaded on his
blog _Rami's Wall_ :

Another Jordanian blogger who participated, was _[Mohammad
Azraq](https://globalvoicesonline.org/author/mohammad-azraq/)_ who in August
summed up [the first part of the
program](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2009/08/29/arab-world-young-people-
gather-to-learn-social-media-tools/) in Sweden in a post on Global Voices. The
focus was largely leadership and teamwork with a component of training in
social media tools.

In addition to the Arab participants, five Swedish journalists took part in
the program. Among them, was Alexandra Sandels who described in an article on
Lebanon news website, _[Menassat](http://www.menassat.com/?q=en/news-
articles/6651-social-media-team-building-and-whole-lot-reflection)_ , how
participants were divided into small groups and given the task to develop an
idea for an innovative project using social media tools. Ideas ranged from web
portals for alternative musicians in the Middle East, to an online graffiti
network, and a web-based recruitment agency for volunteers interested in
working with human rights organizations in the Arab world.

**Panel Discussion: Europe and MENA – Connected or not ?**

[Global Voices in French](https://fr.globalvoicesonline.org) participated in a
panel discussion in the closing seminar for the program “EU-MENA, Connected or
not?” hosted by Javeria Rizvi Kabani, Project Manager of YLVP, and Mikael
Jönsson, Director of the Swedish Institute in Paris. The debates were streamed
live, and are now
[archived](http://bambuser.com/channel/ylvp/broadcast/333518) on
[_bambuser.com_](http://bambuser.com/). Alice Petrén, from the Swedish Public
radio moderated the discussion.

