Since November 26th, Dominicans celebrate the relocation of the [cement
factory](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2009/06/24/dominican-republic-against-
the-cement-factory-in-los-haitises/) proposed to be built in the protected
area of [Los Haitises National
Park](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Los_Haitises_National_Park). Against what
it seemed to be high-level support for the project, the decision of the
[Dominican Mining Consortium (Consorcio Minero Dominicano)
[es]](http://www.comidom.com/) complied with [the rejection of the
construction by the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) at Dominican
Republic [es]](http://www.hoy.com.do/el-pais/2009/11/26/303612/PNUD-rechaza-
instalacion-de-cementera-en-Los-Haitises) and with the demands of public
protests of the community.

Reactions were seen in blogs, Facebook and [Twitter
[es]](http://twitter.com/search?q=cementera%20los%20haitises), like the one of
user [Amelia Odette [es]](http://twitter.com/AmeliaOdette/status/6091887444)
who cheered at the resolution:

> Feliz!! LA CEMENTERA NO VA!! Informe de la ONU determina que no es viable
> cerca de Los Haitises!! Unidos podemos! Felicidades a todos!!! :D

Happy!! THE CEMENT FACTORY WON'T HAPPEN!! Report from the UN states that it is
not viable near Los Haitises!! Together we can do it! Congratulations to
all!!! :D

[![Los Haitises, photo used with permission of the Secretary of Environment,
Dominican Republic](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2009/12/haitises-300x128.jpg)](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2009/12/haitises.jpg)

Los Haitises, photo used with permission of the Secretary of Environment,
Dominican Republic

From both ecological and cultural points of view, choosing Los Haitises to
construct a cement factory was an unfortunate move: not only is the fragile
ecosystem primary source of water for the island, but the site is also home to
cave paintings. Because of its features, Los Haitises is considered Cultural
Heritage of Humanity and it is protected by Dominican laws.

During May and June of this year, protests, marches, concerts and even
Facebook groups campaigned against the cement factory. On the last week of
June the movement created by the community of Gonzalo, the town directly
affected by the project, reached its peak and the construction was suspended
by orders of judge Sarah Henríquez Marín, from the National District Court for
Administrative Law Disputes (Tribunal Contencioso y Administrativo del
Distrito Nacional).

Around the same time, the Dominican government decided to re-evaluate the
project through the [United Nations Development Programme (UNDP)
[es]](http://www.pnud.org.do).

Five months later, specifically on November 26th, the UNDP [declared that the
cement factory construction was “neither viable nor pertinent” on Los Haitises
[es]](http://www.pnud.org.do/el-proyecto-de-la-cementera-en-gonzalo-no-es-
viable-ni-pertinente) because of the irreversible damages that it could cause
to the environment. That same day the Dominican Mining Consortium stated in a
press release that [in spite of their disagreement with it
[es]](http://www.clavedigital.com/App_Pages/Noticias/Noticias.aspx?Id_Articulo=26619),
the organization would comply with the UNDP briefing by selecting another
location to construct the cement factory.

Newspapers and television news shows stand out the importance of the protests
on the positive outcome for Los Haitises, especially the ones involving young
people. Odanis Valdez Polonia, member of the Facebook group [“I support the
fight for the preservation of Los Haitises, NO TO THE CEMENT
FACTORY!!”](http://www.facebook.com/group.php?v=info&ref=search&gid=120992680080),
sums up the situation with these words:

> Para que vean que la union hace la fuerza, gracias a los jovenes, los
> periodistas que hablaron por el pueblo y a todos los involucrados directo e
> indirectos para apoyar lo justo lo invaluable, que es lo que Jaime David
> [Fernández Mirabal, Secretario de Estado de Medio Ambiente y Recursos
> Naturales] no pensó! que secretario de medio ambiente nos gastamos!

See how unity makes us strong, thanks to the young people, the journalists who
spoke for the country and all who were involved directly or indirectly to
support what is fair and cannot be priced, something that Jaime David
[Fernández Mirabal, current secretary of Environment and Natural Resources]
did not think about! what a waste of an Environment secretary!

Translated by [Issa
Villarreal](https://www.globalvoicesonline.org/author/issa-villarreal/)

