Did you know that at this very moment many universities throughout Europe are
occupied by students? Thousands of them are sleeping, cooking, debating and
partying in their auditoriums to protest against the under-financing of the
educational system and the so-called [Bologna
Process](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bologna_process), a European Union
education policy.

What is so special about these protests is the fact that they have not been
centrally coordinated by student unions but have been organized entirely
bottom-up, with the help of online social media.

It all started in Vienna, Austria on October 22, when a small group of
students met for a [flashmob](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Flash_mob) in the
city center to protest, and then headed to University of Vienna where they
spontaneously occupied the Auditorium Maximum. By the time police arrived, the
news of the occupation had already circulated on Twitter, mobilizing so many
supporters it was impossible to clear the hall.

[![Unsereuni website](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2009/12/unsereuni-262x300.png)](http://unsereuni.at/)

Unsereuni website

Within days, the occupiers – to their own surprise – put in place a remarkable
organizational structure: Mobilization and communication was organized via the
Twitter “[hashtags](http://twitter.pbworks.com/Hashtags)”
[#unibrennt](http://twitter.com/#search?q=unibrennt) and
[#unsereuni](http://twitter.com/#search?q=unsereuni) (“university on fire” and
“our university”).

A [24h webcast](http://www.ustream.tv/channel/unsereuni) from the Auditorium
Maximum was put in place. Organizational tasks from cooking to cleaning were
structured via a [wiki](http://unsereuni.at/wiki/), and a
[website](http://unsereuni.at/) communicated with the public. Twitter, blogs
and [Facebook](http://www.facebook.com/unsereuni) (32,400 fans so far) were
used to spread the word.

This had two effects:

\- For the first time protests of this scale did not need the support of mass
media for mobilization. Within less than a week after the beginning of the
protests more than 20,000 demonstrators roamed the streets of Vienna,
preceding any mass media coverage. Media contacts were limited to a bare
minimum (which produced much confusion). Students simply didn‘t need the media
and since the protests lacked hierarchy, there was a shortage of
spokespersons.

\- Second, because everyone could follow what was going on inside the
Auditorium Maximum (the webcast produced half a million views within one
month) it kept the tabloid press from labeling the protesters as rioters or
extremists. Too many people knew it wasn‘t true. The power of opinion-making
had shifted.

Soon the protests infected other university cities in Austria and abroad:
Today, less than a month and a half after the first protests, [almost 100
universities](http://zurpolitik.com/2009/11/10/unsere-unis-eine-karte/) in
Austria, Germany, Switzerland, Albania, Serbia, France, Italy, Croatia and the
Netherlands are occupied or have seen other forms of mass protest.

On _[Wissen belastet](http://www.wissenbelastet.com/)_ , Max Kossatz, a
blogger and media observer from Austria, [has
analyzed](http://wissenbelastet.com/2009/11/27/unibrennt-auf-twitter-eine-
analyse/) [de] the Twitter stream: 66,379 tweets by 6,780 different usernames
have been published on the subject in the last month. 1,043 pictures were
posted on Twitpic and produced 125,612 views – see this [Twitpic photo mashup
on Youtube](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=F-zdRJ0cgXc). And especially
interesting, is the following map of tweets that illustrates how the protests
spread over time (watch in HD and fullscreen to get the full experience):

Gerald Bäck of [_Bäck Blog_](http://www.baeck.at/blog/), who works in the
media observation business, found out that the gross reach of the tweets, i.e.
the unique number of followers exposed to them, was 386,860. [His
analysis](http://www.baeck.at/blog/2009/11/27/unibrennt-215-millionen-
reichweite-in-4-wochen/) [de] shows who the key influencers were, what URLs
were most linked to and what hashtags were used most.

In his blog, [_smime_](http://www.smime.at/blog/), Michael Schuster who is
specialist in semantic analysis, contributed [an
overview](http://www.smime.at/blog/2009/11/28/studentenproteste-und-die-
medien/) [de] of the “old media” covering the events. He counted 2,700
articles and identified four trends lasting roughly one week each: “Protests
take place”, “protests continue”, “protests widen”, and recently, “ok, enough
now.”

Luca Hammer of [_2-Blog_](http://www.2-blog.net/), a student and technical
mastermind behind the Viennese web activities, has published a [field
report](http://www.2-blog.net/2009/unsereuni-und-das-social-web/) [de] of how
wikis, Twitter and webcast were used to get things rolling.

It looks like the case of [#unibrennt](http://twitter.com/#search?q=unibrennt)
may become an early milestone in the transformation of Austrian politics by
the use of online social media. It has created wide attention – and confusion
– among established media and political structures, and created a spirit of
empowerment among students and digital leaders.

