[![TheOneMinutesJr Logo](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2009/11/minutesjrth-75x75.jpg)](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2009/11/minutesjrth.JPG)

OneMinutesJr Logo

The [OneMinutesJr](http://www.theoneminutesjr.org/) project gives young people
between 12 and 20 years of age from many corners of the globe the opportunity
to express themselves, speak out and learn audiovisual skills to communicate
across borders, languages and distances through 60 second videos.

The _OneMinutesJr_ project results from the joint effort of the [European
Cultural Foundation](http://www.eurocult.org/), the [One Minutes Jr.
Foundation](http://www.theoneminutes.org/) and
[Unicef](http://www.unicef.org/), as well as other partner organizations. On
their website, you can browse through years’ worth of one minute videos from
different countries, some sent in by individuals, others are results from
[workshops ](http://www.theoneminutesjr.org/?thisarticle=174)where youth are
taught the skills to write, film and edit their ideas.

These short videos portray the concerns, ideas and dreams of youngsters from
many different backgrounds, and give us a window into their daily lives. For
example, from [Poland, Ludmila
Kierczak](http://www.theoneminutesjr.org/?thissection_id=10&movie_id=200900283&series_id=30)
makes a video explaining who she is. To view the video, please click on the
image below [ to go to the OneMinutesJr
site](http://www.theoneminutesjr.org/?thissection_id=10&movie_id=200900283&series_id=30).

[![Who am I by Ludmila](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2009/11/whoami.JPG)](http://www.theoneminutesjr.org/?thissection_id=10&movie_id=200900283&series_id=30)

In Bangladesh, Mobasshera Tarannum Adiba illustrates a couple of articles from
[the Convention on the Rights of the
Child](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Convention_on_the_Rights_of_the_Child). In
the video, [I want Freedom, ](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=xyC8avD4Xlg)she
touches on Article 12: Children have the right to have their views heard and
their voices should be respected and Article 16 which states that every child
has the right to privacy.

From Mongolia, [Tuvdenjamts (Tuvden) Altankhyag
illustrates](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=cZM87XL71jk) the right every child
has to their own culture:

And in this next video, Simone Tonge from Antigua and Barbuda, exercises her
right to freedom of expression in [Confessions of a Female
Adolescent](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=QnBwfX9EtA0):

Ibrahim Ide from Niger illustrates the right children have to a family that
loves them and protects their rights in [With or
Without](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=8QiDCP5l2x8):

For more one minute videos, you can check out the main site for the project at
[TheOneMinutesJr.org ](http://www.theoneminutesjr.org/)or you can visit the
[UNICEF One Minutes Jr. Channel on
Youtube](http://www.youtube.com/user/UNICEFoneminutesjr) to see many other 60
second videos created by youth on the topic of Childrens’ Rights.

