[![](https://globalvoices.org/wp-content/uploads/2017/05/red-button-Russia-
app-800x400.jpg)](https://globalvoices.org/wp-content/uploads/2017/05/red-
button-Russia-app.jpg)

“Red Button.” Screenshot from app's official website.

A new mobile app for protesters in Russia called “[Red
Button](https://redbtn.info/)” went live for the first time in late April. The
app became available just in time for anti-Putin demonstrations on April 29,
organized by the “Open Russia” movement, whose sister organizations in Britain
were recently outlawed by the Russian Justice Ministry.

By connecting detainees with friends, family, and human rights organizations
more quickly than ever, Red Button hopes to provide protesters with greater
protection from illegal arrests and penalties.

Created by developer Alexander Litreev, the software allows users to report
the time and place of their arrest, and it then automatically identifies the
police station where that person is formally booked. Users can pre-select
friends and family, who are instantly notified of the incident and the
location of the police station, and the app also reports the arrest to human
rights organizations, such as app partner[ OVD Info](https://ovdinfo.org/),
which can provide individuals with legal assistance.

[On Twitter](https://twitter.com/redbtninfo), Red Button also broadcasts the
locations of mass arrests during major demonstrations, allowing other
protesters to avoid potential “hotspots.”

> Россия, Санкт-Петербург, Кронверкский проспект — массовые задержания.
> [pic.twitter.com/UlAMbifBhf](https://t.co/UlAMbifBhf)
>
> — Красная Кнопка (@redbtninfo) [April 29,
> 2017](https://twitter.com/redbtninfo/status/858279824502214657)

> Russia, St. Petersburg, Kronversky prospekt — mass detentions.

In a [blog post](http://telegra.ph/My-zapuskaem-Krasnuyu-Knopku-04-22) on
Telegram, Litreev said he wants Red Button to become an “all-Russian system
for monitoring illegal arrests” and a service to make sure protesters are not
“left one-on-one with the arbitrariness and lawlessness of law enforcement
agencies.”

As political protests seem to be returning to public life in Russia, the app’s
timing is excellent, and it acquired more than [4,000
users](http://www.reuters.com/article/us-russia-protests-app-idUSKBN17S259) on
iOS and Android in just the first few days after it launched.

During anti-Putin protests on April 29, Red Button announced the first arrests
at a demonstration in Kemerovo, where[ at least 13
people](https://meduza.io/feature/2017/04/29/nam-nado-trenirovat-sebya-dalshe-
kak-proshla-protestnaya-aktsiya-nadoel-po-vsey-rossii) were detained. The
rallies were not as large or widespread as a nationwide protest campaign
organized by Alexei Navalny in March, but the day’s rallies did prove to be a
good staging grounds for Red Button.

[According to the website Meduza](https://meduza.io/feature/2017/04/29/nam-
nado-trenirovat-sebya-dalshe-kak-proshla-protestnaya-aktsiya-nadoel-po-vsey-
rossii), several protests across the country were peaceful and without
incident, for example in Novosibirsk and Ufa, but police in St. Petersburg
detained upwards of 50 people.

On April 29, Red Button also had a chance to test out its security measures,
and Litreev
[reported](https://twitter.com/redbtninfo/status/858249347145887744) that the
app’s algorithm rejected more than 270 false alarms.

Litreev says a [better refined version](http://telegra.ph/My-zapuskaem-
Krasnuyu-Knopku-04-22) of the app is coming, ahead of mass rallies in June
planned by Alexei Navalny, who hopes to repeat his success from March with
nationwide demonstrations on Russia Day.

This Wednesday, May 3, a Russian appellate court rejected Navalny’s challenge
to a felony conviction in an embezzlement case, effectively barring him from
running for elected office. Navalny says he is pressing on with his
presidential campaign, however, arguing that federal laws prohibiting his
candidacy are unconstitutional.

It’s a good bet that he’ll plan more mass demonstrations after June, and time
will tell just how many of his supporters will need to push the red button.

