![nagasaki glover gardens](https://globalvoices.org/wp-
content/uploads/2018/07/nagasaki-glober-gardens-800x600.jpg)

Glover Garden in Nagasaki. Photo by Nevin Thompson.

Have you always wanted to visit Japan, but just haven't had the chance?
Perhaps you don't have the time, or a plane ticket (and everything else about
taking a vacation) is just too expensive. Not to worry — YouTube channel
[Kappa2700s](https://www.youtube.com/channel/UCj1-fYrMJ_u0Vzeb0lTEamw) does
all the sightseeing for you.

Devoted to “[Travel, Stroll, and
Eat](https://www.youtube.com/user/kappahakase01s/about)“, and started in July
2012, so far about five million people have watched the channel's videos.

Unlike many commercially-oriented channels that upload videos about tourist
hotspots, the kappa2700s channel one distinct feature: it has no commentary.
Instead, the video features quiet strolls around popular tourist landmarks.

What makes the videos especially useful for travelers or anyone who has an
interest in Japan is that each video includes annotations in English, with
time stamps, of what particular sightseeing spot is on screen.

The Kappa2700s YouTube profile features at least [two
hundred](https://www.youtube.com/user/kappahakase01s/videos) videos from
almost every part of Japan. Here are just a few examples.

## Eastern Kyoto

Kyoto is one of the most popular tourist destinations in Japan, having
welcomed [15 million
visitors](https://www.japantimes.co.jp/news/2018/07/05/national/overcrowded-
sites-packed-buses-main-complaints-kyoto-tourists-record-number-visitors-
flock-city/#.W1Zpp9JKhhE) in 2017. One of the most popular tourist
destinations in the city is its east side, which includes
[Higashiyama](https://www.insidekyoto.com/kyoto-districts). Highlights from
this video include the area around [Kiyomizu
Temple](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=24Rafgh6Km0&t=361s), the neighborhood
of [Gion ](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=24Rafgh6Km0&t=1615s)and
[Pontocho](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=24Rafgh6Km0&t=2787s), a narrow
alley of exclusive tea houses and small bars.

## Maizuru and Amanohashidate

Located on the isolated and largely rural Japan Sea coastline of Kyoto
Prefecture, [Amanohashidate](http://www.amanohashidate.jp/lang/en/) (the
“floating bridge of heaven”) is another popular tourist spot that is still
largely undiscovered by tourists from outside of Japan.

The video beings in Osaka Station, with a stop at the historic navy base of
[Maizuru](https://www.japantimes.co.jp/life/2007/11/09/travel/i-spy-no-
temples-in-kyoto/) along the way. This navy town is famous for its Victorian-
era [red brick
architecture](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=hIJpz44PLFI&t=136s) and [navy
curry](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=hIJpz44PLFI&t=407s) — curry was first
adopted in Japan [by Admiral
Togo](https://forum.axishistory.com/viewtopic.php?t=80545) in the 1870s.

The video concludes with a tour of
[Amanohashidate](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=hIJpz44PLFI&t=919s).

## Kurashiki

[Kurashiki](https://www.kurashiki-tabi.jp/for/en/), in Okayama, in western
Japan, is another tourist destination popular for its number of restored kura
or traditional Japanese storehouses. This video takes a stroll through the
[Kurashiki Bikan Historical
Quarter](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=6wyeWiL80iY&t=435s) and then takes a
tour of [Okayama Castle](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=6wyeWiL80iY&t=2538s).

## Matsuyama and Dogo Onsen

Located on the [northwestern
tip](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Matsuyama,_Ehime) of the island of Shikoku,
Matsuyama is home to probably the most famous hot spring in all of Japan,
[Dogo Onsen](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/D%C5%8Dgo_Onsen).

While the town takes center stage in Natsume Sōseki's 1906 novel
[Botchan](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Botchan) (坊っちゃん), one of Japan's most
famous pieces of literature, the [main public bathhouse](http://en.matsuyama-
sightseeing.com/spot/12/) at Dogo Onsen has inspired the bathhouse in animated
movie [Spirited Away](http://www.ana-
exjapan.com/en/sp/discover/shikoku/pickup/p_06.html).

This video visits [the main
bathhouse](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=kLdv3Iow3NU&t=2724s), and also
makes a pit stop at a cafe selling
[drinks](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=kLdv3Iow3NU&t=2922s) and confections
made from [_yuzu_](https://www.finedininglovers.com/stories/what-is-yuzu-
citrus/) and other citrous fruits grown in the Matsuyama area.

## Nagasaki

While the Kyushu city of Nagasaki may be best known outside of Japan for being
the site of [the second atomic attack that ended World War
II](https://www.newyorker.com/tech/elements/nagasaki-the-last-bomb), this port
city has a long and rich history thanks to its historical connections to
Europe and China.

The video does visit the [Nagasaki Atomic Bomb
Museum](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=5xRQV7MeUpg&t=329s) and the [Peace
Park](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=5xRQV7MeUpg&t=610s), but there's also a
tour of [Glover Garden](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=5xRQV7MeUpg&t=1922s)
and former home of [Thomas
Glover](https://www.japantimes.co.jp/life/2011/12/11/general/the-scot-who-
shaped-japan/#.W1Zx09JKhhE), a Scotsman who settled in Nagasaki shortly after
Japan opened up to the outside world starting in the 1860s. Glover served as a
conduit to transfer European technologies — including guns — to Japan, and may
have helped start the country on its path to World War II.

## Visit almost every part of Japan from YouTube

These tours just scratch the surface. The kappa2700s channel has hundreds of
videos taken all over Japan, including a number of videos taken in
[Nara](https://www.youtube.com/playlist?index=1&list=PL34drbq8KrXo5HE5crTEBnpiWfrAWA769&playnext=1),
Japan's ancient capital, and
[Osaka](https://www.youtube.com/playlist?index=1&list=PL34drbq8KrXpGrmGrIN9Yj65bkpVS_49w&playnext=1),
Japan's gritty and colorful second city.

If you're looking for [a view of iconic Mount
Fuji](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=OVg5fCk043c&t=1061s), kappa2700s has it
covered, too.

