[![](https://globalvoices.org/wp-
content/uploads/2018/12/vvait-800x450.jpg)](https://www.videovolunteers.org/no-
arrests-made-in-amit-topno-murder-case/)

Screenshot from YouTube Video

_This post was written by[Nupur Sonar](https://www.videovolunteers.org/no-
arrests-made-in-amit-topno-murder-case/) and originally appeared on Video
Volunteers, an award-winning international community media organization based
in India._

In the early hours of 9 December 2018, Video Volunteer Community Correspondent
Amit Topno [was found murdered](https://www.groundxero.in/2018/12/11/adivasi-
journalist-covering-pathalgadi-movement-went-missing-now-found-dead/) in
Ghaghra area of [Jharkhand](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Jharkhand), India.
Topno, an [Adivasi](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Adivasi) (indigenous)
inhabitant of the conflict-prone region of
[Khunti](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Khunti), Jharkhand, had been with Video
Volunteers (VV) since 2012, reported for Newscode and OK Times, and most
recently drove a taxi for Ola Cab.

Topno reported fearlessly on issues like sand mining, illegal alcohol sales,
Adivasi rights, education, sanitation, human trafficking, land rights, culture
and most recently the Pathalgadi movement. His last report for VV was produced
six months ago on the
[Pathalgadi](https://www.thehindu.com/news/national/other-states/the-
pathalgadi-rebellion/article23530998.ece), a movement in which Adivasi
communities across Jharkhand and Chhattisgarh asserted their right to self-
governance. The movement has its roots in creating awareness and ensuring
implementation of the key provisions of the Panchayats (Extensions Scheduled
Areas) Act, 1996 that empower a village as an administrative unit.

Besides being a community journalist, Topno was a social activist too. He
followed up his video reports with on-the-ground action to solve the problem
he was reporting. He held community screenings, conducted village meetings,
assisted the community in writing applications and approaching government
officials and worked towards ensuring accountability. It made schools safer
and encouraged the administration to deal with issues like the human-animal
conflict in the area. He is remembered by those who knew him as an
inquisitive, warm, fun loving and an extremely helpful and courageous
individual. In a 2015 interview, Topno said:

> Jharkhand is a land caught up in a frightful storm. Its people are being
> whirled around in a storm of starvation, conflict, and poverty. I am the
> headman of my village, Nichitpur, Jharkhand, and I’m tired of seeing my
> people die,” said Amit in an interview in 2014.

Topno’s body was found on the Namkum-Doranda road in
[Ranchi](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ranchi) on 9 December. The autopsy
report reveals that he was shot twice and one of the bullets was still lodged
in. The autopsy report also states that there were no signs of struggle or
scuffle, not even a scratch. His taxi, phone and identity cards were missing
but money was not. No weapon was recovered from the scene of the crime. All of
this points to a pre-meditated and professionally executed murder. Over 11
days have passed since his murder and no arrests have been made in the case
yet — though the police have said that they are closing on some leads.

On 14 December, more than a 100 people, including social movement leaders,
activists, journalists, students and members of the VV network participated in
a silent candlelight march to protest his murder. At the march, Jerrome Kujur,
Dayamani Barla, Deepak Bara spoke out about the frequent threats and
harassment of activists and journalists in Jharkhand. They urged the state to
conduct a thorough investigation into this case and bring Amit Topno’s
murderers to justice.

On 15 December 2018, a delegation of civil society organisations including VV
met the superintendent of police and urged him to conduct a thorough and
speedy investigation into Topno’s murder. The SSP assured that all possible
angles will be investigated.

On 17 December 2018, the Jharkhand Jantantrik Mahasabha organised a peaceful
protest in [Jamshedpur](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Jamshedpur). Friends and
allies of Amit also submitted an application to the National Scheduled Tribe
Commission urging them to take note of the gruesome murder. Civil society
organisations appraised this matter to the Chief Secretary of Jharkhand
government and other ministers on 19 December 2018. Arup Chatterjee, an MLA
from Nirsa Dhanbad, was handed over documents related to Topno’s work and he
has promised to raise the issue in the upcoming winter session of the assembly
starting on 24th December.

Though Topno did not inform his colleagues of any threats to him in the last
18 months, it cannot be ruled out that he was murdered because of his work as
a journalist and social activist, raising issues affecting communities on the
margins and working in an area where conflict over land resources is rife. In
November 2018, another journalist from the same area was murdered. At a time
when India ranks 14th on the Global Impunity Index, Topno’s murder is a
reminder that journalists who speak truth to power and report out of remote,
rural areas are not safe.

