![](https://globalvoices.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/11/DSC_0116-800x531.jpg)

Qaraoun Lake and Dam. Photo By Christophe Maroun

On Thursday, November 8, 2018, Lebanon's caretaker Minister of Industry
ordered the [shutting down of 75
factories](http://www.dailystar.com.lb/News/Lebanon-
News/2018/Nov-09/468722-government-gets-tough-on-polluters-of-litani-
river.ashx) operating without a valid license in the Bekaa region, for their
role polluting the Litani River.

The Litani, the longest river in the country, is an essential source of water
for irrigation and hydroelectricity production. It is more than 140 km long
and produces an average annual flow of 920 million cubic meters.

Throughout the years, the river has been subject to many physical
transformations that have caused a number of hydrological changes in its
basin. Notable ones include the Litani River Dam, which was completed in 1959,
along with the creation of Qaraoun Lake. The reservoir has been used for
hydropower generation, domestic water supply, irrigation, and recreation.

Today, the river is threatened by many risks and hazards. According to the
Litani River Authority (LRA), a government body formed in 1954 to facilitate
the integrated development of the Litani River Basin, the [main
issues](http://www.litani.gov.lb/en/?page_id=71) affecting the Litani are the
uncontrolled exploitation and abuse of water resources, and the polluted
wastewater flowing directly into the river basin from households and
factories.

In 2014, the Lebanese government put in place a $730 million proposal in a bid
to clean up the catastrophic pollution of the Litani River and Qaraoun Lake
and prevent future contamination. The Daily Star
[reported](http://www.dailystar.com.lb/News/Lebanon-
News/2014/Jun-06/259053-730m-plan-to-clean-up-the-litani-unveiled.ashx) that
this seven-year plan was meant to expand sewage treatment networks, manage
solid waste and pesticide pollution, and help factories reduce the dumping of
chemicals into the water. The project never saw the light.

Four years later, not much seems to have changed. In July 2016, [tests done by
the South Lebanon Water
Establishment](http://www.dailystar.com.lb/News/Lebanon-
News/2016/Jul-09/361117-litani-pollution-causes-local-outrage-distress.ashx)
showed that the Litani’s muddy waters contained bacteria that cause a
multitude of diseases, including typhoid and salmonella. Even the land
surrounding the river was not spared, as 37 per cent of the area has been
infected with salmonella, according to the SLWA (the accepted “safe” level is
two per cent).

The waters became so polluted that the World Bank agreed to a loan of [$55
million](http://projects.worldbank.org/P147854?lang=en) to reduce the quantity
of untreated municipal sewage discharged into the Litani River and to improve
pollution management around Qaraoun Lake. But given the government's recent
failures, environmental activists are unsure about the effectiveness of such a
project.

A study by the [American University of
Beirut](http://website.aub.edu.lb/news/2013/Pages/water-contamination.aspx)
has shown that water extracted from the Litani during the drier summer months
is basically sewage. Vegetables irrigated with contaminated river water were
shown to contain a high accumulation of trace metals, which can affect the
central nervous system and disrupt cardiovascular and kidney function.

Ongoing negligence has led to many protests from citizens whose livelihoods
are directly linked to the river. In August 2016, residents of Qaraoun
Village, a lakeside town on the the edge of the Qaraoun Lake, [cut off
irrigation canals](http://www.dailystar.com.lb/News/Lebanon-
News/2016/Aug-14/367101-qaraoun-residents-cut-off-irrigation-canals-to-
protest-lake-
pollution.ashx?utm_source=Magnet%26utm_medium=Entity%20page%26utm_campaign=Magnet%20tools)
in protest at the pollution in the reservoir and the foul smell it was
emitting. Earlier this summer, [owners of restaurants and
resorts](http://www.dailystar.com.lb/News/Lebanon-
News/2016/Jul-18/362723-south-lebanon-residents-say-litani-pollution-
destroyed-tourism-demand-
compensation.ashx?utm_source=Magnet%26utm_medium=Entity%20page%26utm_campaign=Magnet%20tools)
in South Lebanon called for the government to compensate them for the losses
they sustained due to the ongoing pollution of the Litani River.

On November 9, 2018, the LRA
[published](https://twitter.com/LRALitani/status/1060917984208805888) a list
of factories which, after a thorough technical assessment, have been accused
by the Zahle criminal court of polluting the Litani River. In addition, they
shared a short video showing the extent of the damage done to the river basin
as a result of the lack of enforcement of environmental laws. The LRA insists
that the protection of the Litani River from industrial pollution starts with
the imposition of environmental compliance standards on licensed and
unlicensed institutions.

> حماية نهر الليطاني من التلوث الصناعي .. تنطلق من فرض معايير الالتزام البيئي
> على المؤسسات المرخصة وغير
> المرخصة[#المصلحة_الوطنية_لنهر_الليطاني](https://twitter.com/hashtag/%D8%A7%D9%84%D9%85%D8%B5%D9%84%D8%AD%D8%A9_%D8%A7%D9%84%D9%88%D8%B7%D9%86%D9%8A%D8%A9_%D9%84%D9%86%D9%87%D8%B1_%D8%A7%D9%84%D9%84%D9%8A%D8%B7%D8%A7%D9%86%D9%8A?src=hash&ref_src=twsrc%5Etfw)
> [pic.twitter.com/4zc431yWrM](https://t.co/4zc431yWrM)
>
> — LRA Litani River Authority (@LRALitani) [November 10,
> 2018](https://twitter.com/LRALitani/status/1061271769644969985?ref_src=twsrc%5Etfw)

> The protection of the Litani River from industrial pollution… Starts from
> the imposition of environmental compliance standards on licensed and
> unlicensed institutions. #TheNationalLitaniRiverAutority

#### Water management, a national problem

In their documentary about the political economy of water in Lebanon,
researcher Dr. Karim Eid-Sabbagh and independent journalist Paul Cochrane
highlight the dangerous effects of environmental degradation on the country's
water resources. Their film, [We Made Every Living Thing from
Water](https://www.facebook.com/EveryLivingThingFromWater/), shows how
citizens are mobilizing in the face of government disregard for ecological
issues, to preserve this valuable resource.

In the context of a weak institutional and regulatory framework, the Lebanese
water sector [faces many
challenges](https://www.facebook.com/EveryLivingThingFromWater/videos/223030661598904/).
[Fanack Water](https://water.fanack.com/lebanon/challenges/), which aims to
provides accessible, well-researched information on the state of water
resources in the MENA region, outlines some of the main issues: inefficient
public water distribution system, poor service delivery performance, and poor
wastewater management, in addition to the issues caused by the sector’s
fragmented institutional and legal framework.

