![katsura sunhine](https://globalvoices.org/wp-
content/uploads/2017/09/katsura-sunshine-800x450.png)

Katsura Sunshine (桂 三輝 Katsura Sanshain). [Screencap from
YouTube](https://youtu.be/2SamHpK6dew) video by NikkeiTV.

A Canadian comic and playwright is successfully taking on one of Japan's most
popular traditional forms of entertainment with a goal of introducing it to
the world.

Katsura “Sunshine” (桂 三輝, _Katsura Sanshain)_ has mastered _rakugo_ , Japan's
“[art of comic storytelling](http://www.nippon.com/en/features/jg00045/)“.
He's the only officially qualified non-Japanese rakugo professional in the
world and gets the first part of his name from [Katsura Bunshi
VI](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Katsura_Bunshi_VI), the “master” who taught
him the ropes.

The second part of his stage name, 三輝, or “Sanshain”, is also a reference to
his lineage, and is also intended to be a play on words to match his sunny
disposition and cheerful blonde hair.

As a performance art, rakugo itself is deceptively simple. [According to
Katsura Sunshine](https://sunshineinenglish.wordpress.com/what-is-rakugo/):

> A minimalistic performance art, _Rakugo_ features a lone storyteller dressed
> in kimono, kneeling on a cushion, who, using only a fan and a hand towel for
> props, entertains the audience with a comic monologue followed by a
> traditional story.

While Katsurua Sunshine does perform in Japanese, he also has made an effort
to translate the artform into English. Here is an example of rakugo, where
Katsura Sunshine dissects the complexity of Japanese “polite language”, with
perplexing results:

Originally from Toronto, Canada, Katsura (then named Gregory Robic) first
arrived in Japan in 1999, intending to stay [for only six
months](https://www.japantimes.co.jp/culture/2014/10/15/stage/katsura-
sunshines-star-english/#.WciMVsh95hE). Nine years later he was still in Japan,
and decided to train as a rakugo storyteller. In recent years Katsura Sunshine
has taken his show on the road, performing in front of international
audiences.

Here's an example of his show:

In the same set, Katsura Sunshine tells the story of Jugemu
([寿限無](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Jugemu)) a Japanese folktale and that is
one of the most famous stories in rakugo, and a word that every Japanese
student must memorize in elementary school:

At the moment Katsura Sunshine is based in Ise, a small city in rural Japan.
He regularly performs around the world, and intends to at some point open an
an off-Broadway show devoted to rakugo.

Katsura Sunshine's Rakugo performances can be found online on his [YouTube
channel](https://www.youtube.com/user/KatsuraSunshine/videos), and on
[Timeline](https://www.youtube.com/channel/UCYPYH0FUbh_9xVr9ivEX7pQ/search?query=%E6%A1%82%E4%B8%89%E8%BC%9D),
a Japanese site focusing on news, technology and entertainment.

