Job hunting for fresh graduates in Japan is an intense trial called _shushoku
katsudo_ or _shukatsu_ for short. University students in their third year
start _shukatsu_ during the winter in hopes of receiving several _naitei_
(informal job offer/promise of employment) in May at the earliest, to start
their new jobs on April 1st of the following year. [Trapped in
Japan](http://trapped-in-japan.blogspot.com/2008/11/job-hunting.html) refers
to it as the “last war for the Japanese kids”, fought after the better-known
hell of university entrance exams.

![](http://farm1.static.flickr.com/99/302713049_a97f94f797.jpg?v=0)

Photo by [pottiri12](http://www.flickr.com/photos/pottiri12/302713049/) of a
typical event in the early stages of _shukatsu_

This year, hundreds of students are having their _naitei_ canceled by
companies suffering from a rapidly declining economy. [The Ministry of Health,
Labour and Welfare has reported](http://www.mhlw.go.jp/seisaku/26.html) [ja]
the number to be 331 as of November 28th, but numbers are escalating and the
situation remains unclear as many students are thought to be quietly
conceding. For example, [Japan Senior High School Teachers and Staff Union
recently claimed](http://www.nikkokyo.org/news/2008/12/2.php) [ja] that 76
high school students have had their _naitei_ canceled, much higher than the 29
that the Ministry reported last month.

Essayist Tatsuru Ueda refers to an article from Asahi Shimbun and [makes a
prediction](http://blog.tatsuru.com/2008/10/29_1836.php):

>
> _「このまま入ってきてくれても希望の部署にはいけないと思う。あなたのキャリアを傷つけることになるので、就職活動を再開した方がいい」関西の私立大に通う４年生の学生（２１）は先週初め、５月に内定をもらった大手メーカー（東京）から、電話で内定「辞退」を促された。_
>
> 「就職氷河期」というかつて一世を風靡した言葉がまた復活することになるのかも知れない。

_“You probably won't be able to work in the division of your choice. You
should start shukatsu again because joining this company will end up hurting
your career.” A 21 year old student at a private university in the Kansai
region was urged to ‘decline’ her naitei that was offered in May from a major
manufacturer in Tokyo._

