Many different subjects were in the spotlight last week, in the Moroccan
blogosphere.

I'll start with _Farid_ and his [interesting numbers](http://maroc-
blogs.blogspot.com/2006/12/quelques-chiffres-sur-la-blogoma.html) (Fr) about
blogging in Morocco. Then comes _Reda_ who found out, thanks to [Shimon
Peres](http://www.ynetnews.com/articles/0,7340,L-3339781,00.html), that there
is a connection between [laziness and
Islam](http://hamadiblog.blogspot.com/2006/12/islam-bashing.html)(Fr).

> The European Union is a great success and a great failure. Why? Because the
> Europeans have become lazy – they don’t have children […] There is more old
> age, less youngsters. In Europe there is work, but no workers. In Africa
> it's the opposite. That is why they brought the Muslims, and Islam made its
> way into Europe.

_Amine_ , a big fan of [Tom and
Jerry](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=5VMnrZc7UO0), like most of us, posts
about the [legendary cartoon-maker](http://www.oulahcen.com/2006/12/20/tom-
jerry-le-dessinateur-nous-a-quitte/)(Fr) [Joseph
Barbera](http://www.andnetwork.com/index?service=direct/0/Home/recent.fullStory&sp=l102196)
who died Monday at 95.

**A sour laugh?**

![the cover story that divided the Moroccan opinion](/wp-
content/uploads/2006/12/326456823_1de198f2a1_m1.jpeg)[Nichane](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Nichane)
is under attack. The reason? A cover story published by the satirical magazine
about the most popular jokes in Morocco. Well, it turned out that Moroccans
like to laugh about Power, Sex, and Religion. Nothing really specific to
Morocco since that's mostly what jokes are about all over the world. Some
jokes were [about God and the
prophets](http://www.nichane.ma/sommaire//1377.html) (Ar), and for
[Khorafa](http://hewar.khorafa.org/)‘s(Ar) visitors, that was [worse than the
Danish cartoons](http://hewar.khorafa.org/?p=16)(Ar).  
  
The Moroccan journalist and blogger [Mohamed
lachyeb](http://lachyab.jeeran.com)(Ar) is asking his visitors [to
condemn](http://lachyab.jeeran.com/archive/2006/12/131939.html)(Ar) Nichane.  
Koweit is also [mad at
Nichane](http://lachyab.jeeran.com/archive/2006/12/132423.html)(Ar), and Driss
Ksikes, Nichane's director of publication, may apologize to his readers next
week.  
A law suit is about to be filed against the magazine, and for _M.S.Hjiouj_ all
this is [simply ridicilous!](http://www.mshjiouij.com/blog/archives/69)(Ar).

في هذه الحالة إذن على القائمين بهذه الحملة مقاضاة كل المغاربة الذين ساهموا في
تأليف تلك النكت ونشرها والتعديل عليها

In this case, they have to file a lawsuit against all the Moroccans who
participated in writing those jokes and publishing them

What about those who laughed at them?

**Muslim Santa!**

_Laila Lalami_[posts about a Muslim
Santa](http://www.lailalalami.com/blog/archives/004557.html#004557) living in
Casablanca! And that is not the only thing that is surprising her.

> There is still, fifty years after independence, a persistent association of
> anything French with “better.” People are driving themselves into the
> poorhouse trying to send their kids to French lycées. A few department
> stores and private schools here in Casa also throw Christmas celebrations,
> complete with trees, trimmings, and multicolored lights. It's bizarre.

Morocco has proposed the construction of a mosque in the [Chinese
capital](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Beijing),
[writes](http://riadzany.blogspot.com/2006/12/morocco-to-build-mosque-in-
beijing.html) _Samir_ one of the authors of the [View from
Fez](http://riadzany.blogspot.com/).

> The mosque, according to the minister, is meant to help revive the symbolic
> dimension of the journey of famed Moroccan traveler, Ibn Battouta to China.

Do you feel like sharing your thoughts with a very “popular” president? Well,
_eatbees_ [has exactly the right e-address for
you](http://www.eatbees.com/blog/2006/12/19/ahmadinejad-blog/). The blog of
the Iranian president is [ranked 204th in the
world](http://www.technorati.com/blogs/http://www.ahmadinejad.ir/), and it
seems that [Ahmadinejad](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mahmoud_Ahmadinejad)
reads each message personally.

> Is Ahmadinejad sincere in his desire to communicate with the West, or is he
> just a cunning propagandist searching for ever more innovative ways to pull
> the wool over our eyes?

_Attareq_ blogs mostly about his daily life, and it's written in a simple yet
eloquent style. The post about the [death of his unborn
baby](http://attaarik.maktoobblog.com/?post=94310)(Ar) is sad and touching and
the latest one about the accident Attareq [witnessed in the
morning](http://attaarik.maktoobblog.com/?post=154199)(Ar) is surreal!

_Adil R._ who usually [blogs from Washington
D.C](http://adilski.blogspot.com/2006/12/visiting-morocco-sooncount-down.html)
is in Morocco for a short visit. He is [surprised to witness new
“behaviors”](http://adilski.blogspot.com/2006/12/greetings-from-casa-ii.html)
taking place in his neighborhood's cozy cyber-cafe.

> You can hear some speaking Moroccan while others speak other middle eastern
> ,Gulf to be more precise, accents.Talked to my friends about this little
> phenomenon and they even told me about the private cyber sex sessions that
> often take place.

**Gossips…Gossips…Gossips**

_Abdellatif Mossadeq_ is
[celebrating](http://abourim03.maktoobblog.com/?post=160788)(Ar) his first
year of blogging, congratulations.

_Label ash_ is [paying a
tribute](http://labelash.blogspot.com/2006/12/ibrahim-ferrer-tribute.html)(Fr)
to [Ibrahim Ferrer](http://www.afrocubaweb.com/ibrahimferrer.html) and _le
mythe_ [is celebrating Al
Aloua](http://lemythe.com/blog/index.php?2006/12/19/84-al-aloua)(Fr), a
[Moroccan folk genre of music](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=nSWLRiu6DWk).

_Anima_ is back and happy! She [received an
email](http://anima.canalblog.com/archives/2006/12/19/3468318.html#trackbacks)
promising her love and passion and…marriage!

_Blafrancya_ is delighted to [blog about Sherbel
Rouhana](http://blafrancia.maktoobblog.com/?post=164987)(Ar), a singer who
does not understand why some Lebanese insist on using French or English words
instead of Arabic ones. Congratulations Lebanon, you have your own
Blafrancya;)

That's it for today. See you next Wednesday, Inshallah;)

