![](https://advox.globalvoices.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/02/censorship-
doctorow-ccsa2.jpg)

Photo by Cory Doctorow. (CC BY-SA 2.0)

#### The Advox Netizen Report offers an international snapshot of challenges,
victories, and emerging trends in Internet rights around the world.

In the wake of public panic surrounding a spike in threats of violence and
hate speech online, the European Commission has been preparing new
recommendations on how member states should address “illegal online content.”

Although they have not been officially submitted, a [leaked
draft](https://edri.org/files/illegal_content_ec_draft_recommendation_201802.pdf)
of the recommendations has begun to circulate and is now accessible on the
website of European Digital Rights, a coalition group of civil society and
human rights groups dedicated to protecting free speech and privacy online.
The draft suggests that the Commission will not propose new regulations, but
rather envisions private companies like Facebook and Google taking greater
responsibility for these issues voluntarily.

In a [brief analysis](https://edri.org/leak-european-commissions-reckless-
draft-recommendation-illegal-content/) of the recommendations, EDRi’s Joe
McNamee writes:

> On the basis of no new analyses, no new data and no new pressing issues to
> be addressed, the[ leaked draft
> Recommendation](https://edri.org/files/illegal_content_ec_draft_recommendation_201802.pdf)
> seeks to fully privatise the task of deciding what is acceptable online or
> not. The only protection for user rights like freedom of expression is an
> unenforceable hope that certain “adequate safeguards” will be put in place
> voluntarily by the companies. The draft reminds readers – twice – that the
> providers have “contractual freedom”, meaning that any such safeguards will
> be purely optional.

The only specific types of online content referenced in the draft are
“terrorist material” (no definition offered) and content under copyright.
McNamee argues that “the repeated references to measures proposed to address
copyright and ‘intellectual property rights’ infringements gives an indication
of the real driving force behind for such far-reaching measures.”

### **Bangladesh orders internet shutdown, then backs down**

On February 11, the Bangladesh Telecommunications Regulatory Commission
[ordered internet service
providers](http://www.dhakatribune.com/regulation/2018/02/11/internet-
services-suspended-throughout-country/) to shut down the internet over a few
set time periods, during the month of February that corresponds with national
university placement exams. The impetus for the temporary shutdowns was to
stifle the circulation of leaked answers to the exams. The order was [swiftly
reversed](https://bdnews24.com/bangladesh/2018/02/12/btrc-reverses-internet-
outage-plan-to-fight-ssc-question-leaks) following broad public criticism.

### **Malawi suspends mandatory SIM card registration until further notice**

The Malawi Communications Regulatory Authority [announced in June
2017](http://www.macra.org.mw/be-patriotic-register-your-sim-card/) that it
would become mandatory for mobile phone users to register their SIM cards with
network operators, citing registration provisions in the Communications Act of
2016. In late January, [authorities doubled
down](http://www.itnewsafrica.com/2018/01/malawi-authority-sets-deadline-for-
sim-card-registration/) on this promise and set a deadline for SIM
registration, threatening that any phone with an unregistered card would have
its service shut off on April 1, 2018.

But this week, the measure was suspended, with authorities citing the need for
a “civic education” campaign on the matter before resuming registration
practices. [Azania Post reports](http://www.azaniapost.com/africa/malawi-
legislators-fear-sim-card-registration-will-invalidate-peoples-h13059.html)
that some citizens have shown reluctance to register their SIM cards for fear
that the program is “a ploy by the government to tap people’s phones.”

### **Research shows that European telcos behave better at home than in
Africa**

A [new study](https://internetwithoutborders.org/droits-numeriques-afrique-
sub-saharienne-analyse-pratiques-dorange-senegal-safaricom-kenya/) by the
French NGO Internet San Frontieres shows that major European
telecommunications providers offering services in Sub-Saharan Africa do not
offer the same levels of transparency and consumer protection to African
customers as they do to their European markets. The study compares the
practices and policies of Orange in Senegal and Safaricom (owned by Vodafone)
in Kenya.

### **Brazil’s largest newspaper ditches Facebook**

Folha de Sao Paulo
[announced](https://advox.globalvoices.org/2018/02/09/brazils-largest-
newspaper-quits-facebook-accuses-it-of-harboring-fake-news/) that it will no
longer post news articles or updates on its Facebook page, which has nearly
six million followers. In an [editorial-like
article](https://www1.folha.uol.com.br/poder/2018/02/folha-deixa-de-publicar-
conteudo-no-facebook.shtml), the company said the decision stems primarily
from Facebook's recent decision to reduce the amount of newsfeed content from
Facebook pages, instead favoring posts by friends and family. Folha’s
executive editor accused Facebook of “…banning professional journalism from
its pages in favour of personal content and opening space for ‘fake news’ to
proliferate.”

### **Big advertiser threatens to leave Facebook, calling it a ‘swamp’**

The behemoth British-Dutch company Unilever, which owns major food and
toiletry brands including Lipton tea and Dove soap, is threatening to pull its
advertising from Facebook. [CNN
published](http://money.cnn.com/2018/02/12/media/unilever-advertising-
facebook-google-swamp/index.html?sr=twCNN021218unilever-advertising-facebook-
google-swamp1149AMStory) a pre-released copy of a speech by Unilever marketing
executive Keith Weed in which he says that the company “cannot continue to
prop up a digital supply chain … which at times is little better than a swamp
in terms of its transparency.” CNN says that Weed attributed the move to a
“proliferation of objectionable content on social media — and a lack of
protections for children — is eroding social trust, harming users and
undermining democracies.”

### **Facebook is violating German consumer laws**

A [Berlin court
ruling](https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2018/feb/12/facebook-personal-
data-privacy-settings-ruled-illegal-german-court) (made in January but
released to the public in mid-February) found that Facebook’s default settings
for privacy and corresponding policies do not meet the basic standards for
personal data protection required by German consumer protection laws. The
ruling is the result of a lawsuit filed by the Federation of German consumer
organizations, VZBV. The company has pledged to overhaul its privacy approach
in tandem with the release of the EU General Data Protection Regulation.

### New Research

  * [Digital Rights in Sub-Saharan Africa: Analyzing the Practices of Orange in Senegal and Safaricom in Kenya](https://internetwithoutborders.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/02/RDR_Afrique_version_finale_5_Janvier_2018.pdf) – Internet Sans Frontieres (text in French)
  * [Approaching Access: A look at consumer personal data requests in Canada](https://citizenlab.ca/2018/02/approaching-access-look-consumer-personal-data-requests-canada/) – Citizen Lab

## [**Subscribe to the Netizen Report**](http://eepurl.com/Y-f11)

[Afef Abrougui](https://advox.globalvoices.org/author/afef-abrougui/), [Ellery
Roberts Biddle](https://advox.globalvoices.org/author/ellery-roberts-biddle/),
[Rezwan Islam](https://advox.globalvoices.org/author/rezwan/), [Karolle
Rabarison](https://globalvoices.org/author/karolle-tiana/), [Elizabeth
Rivera](https://advox.globalvoices.org/author/erivera/), [Taisa
Sganzerla](https://globalvoices.org/author/taisa-sganzerla/), and[ Sarah Myers
West](https://advox.globalvoices.org/author/sarahbmyers/) contributed to this
report.

