In this week’s round-up from Egypt, _Big Pharaoh_ is back, bloggers are
unhappy with the Press, a blogger who was arrested last week is now free,
public opinion is not taken on top movies, and finally a court case in motion
to block and shut down 50 blogs and websites.

**Big Pharaoh is Back:** Egyptian blogger [Big Pharaoh
](http://www.bigpharaoh.com/2007/06/20/new-egyptian-police-brutality/)who has
been away for sometime for work-related reasons is back to the blogoshphere.
He is one of the most popular Egyptian bloggers who writes in English. Big
pharaoh in [this blog post ](http://www.bigpharaoh.com/2007/06/20/new-
egyptian-police-brutality/)is publishing a video that reveals aggression
against citizens in police stations. Bloggers in Egypt are contributing to a
campaign against violence by publishing videos shot in police stations. One of
those videos led to the trial of one of the police officers who is now
awaiting a final sentence in July. Welcome back _Big Pharaoh_ , do not stop
blogging!

**Bloggers are Unhappy with the Press:**
[Arabawy](http://arabist.net/arabawy/2007/06/19/shame-on-al-masry-al-
youm-%D8%A7%D9%84%D9%85%D9%81%D8%A8%D8%B1%D9%83-%D8%A7%D9%84%D9%8A%D9%88%D9%85/)
and [Wael Abbass ](http://misrdigital.blogspirit.com/)are expressing their
unhappiness with one of the Egyptian independent daily newspapers. _Al-Masry
Al-Youm_ is one of Egypt's papers that has won quite good amount of
credibility, however _Arabawy_ and _Abbass_ believe that its performance has
hit very low rates. _Arabawy_[says:
](http://arabist.net/arabawy/2007/06/19/shame-on-al-masry-al-
youm-%D8%A7%D9%84%D9%85%D9%81%D8%A8%D8%B1%D9%83-%D8%A7%D9%84%D9%8A%D9%88%D9%85/)

> “What was once my favorite independent daily, Al-Masry Al-Youm has become a
> nightmare to read, with an increasing tendency towards fabrications and
> sensationalism…”

[Abbass](http://misrdigital.blogspirit.com/) believes that the editorial
policy of _Al-Masry Al-Youm_ became controversial and that bloggers’ news is
fabricated which was not the case before. He wrote that some articles
published recently were belittling the bloggers’ efforts.

**Arrested Blogger is Released:** _Manfe_ blog
[reported](http://manfe.blogspot.com/2007/06/blog-post_15.html) that _Omar El-
Sharkway_ , who [was arrested last
week](https://www.globalvoicesonline.org/2007/06/14/egypt-another-blogger-
arrest/), is now free. _Manfe_ wrote a thank you message on behalf of _El-
Sharkawy_ to thank everyone who showed him support.

And in interview with _Omar_ on _Manfe blog_ , he
[says](http://manfe.blogspot.com/2007/06/blog-post_16.html) that on the day of
the Shura Council elections he finished his work and out of curiosity he went
to his polling station with his camera. His intention was to photograph any
breaching committed by the security. He took pictures for the employees
filling in the voting cards on behalf of the voters. He also took pictures for
the security officers hindering citizens from entering the polling station to
cast their ballot. On his way out, he said in the interview that he was
stopped by a police officer because one of the employees told the officer he
was taking pictures for them. And at this point he says “I was kidnapped by
the Egyptian police.”

The good news is that _Omar El-Sharkawy_ now is free. I would like to
congratulate him on his courage. At the very end of the interview when asked
if he will continue to blog and investigate, he answered that he will continue
to blog and he wishes that his blog becomes a heard voice to disclose anything
that can hurt Egypt.

**No Public Opinion on Movies:**
[Zeinobia](http://zeinobia.wordpress.com/2007/06/20/%D9%85%D8%A6%D8%A9-%D8%B3%D9%86%D8%A9-%D8%B3%D9%86%D9%8A%D9%85%D8%A7/)
is commenting on the Egyptian daily newspaper _Al-Ahram's_ review that picked
the top old 15 movies of the Egyptian movie industry based on some critics’
choices. _Zeinobia_ is wondering why comedies are denied. The movie industry
has great comedies, according to the blog post. Most of the picked movies are
too serious and dramatic. _Zeinobia i_ s also very surprised that critics who
picked those movies did not consider the public opinion or take the readers’
opinions as the case with most world papers and magazines.

**Court case to Block 50 blogs and Websites might be Rejected:** And I am
ending my weekly round-up on a positive note from [Egypt Watchman's
blog](http://egyptwatchman.blogspot.com/2007/06/blog-post_3260.html). Few
months ago, a judge filed a court case to block and shut down 50 blogs and
websites because he thinks they threaten Egypt’s interests and bring its
reputation down. The court asked for a report to investigate the request and
those sites. [Egypt Watchman says
](http://egyptwatchman.blogspot.com/2007/06/blog-post_3260.html)that the
report mentioned that the judge is not entitled to file such a case in court
in the first place. He adds that this case is one of the manifestations of the
war in Egypt on the freedom of expression on the internet that has started
with sentencing [Karim Amer ](tp://karam903.blogspot.com/)to four years in
prison and with the recent random detentions of bloggers in Egypt.

I will leave here with this semi-good news and see you all next week!

