![During the school week, Arlet Burciaga rides a bus toward the international
bridge in Ciudad Juárez.  Credit: Miguel Gutierrez Jr./KUT News. Used with
permission.](https://globalvoices.org/wp-content/uploads/2015/11/St-Raymonds-
for-web-press-page_0-800x451.jpg)

During the school week, Arlet Burciaga rides a bus toward the international
bridge in Ciudad Juárez. Credit: Miguel Gutierrez Jr./KUT News. Used with
permission.

_This article and radio report by[Kate McGee](http://www.pri.org/people/kate-
mcgee) and photographer [Miguel Gutierrez
Jr.](http://www.pri.org/people/miguel-gutierrez-jr) for [The
World](http://www.pri.org/programs/the-world) originally [appeared on
PRI.org](http://www.pri.org/stories/2015-11-05/two-country-journey-one-
student-takes-every-day-get-school) on November 5, 2015, and is republished
here as part of a content-sharing agreement._

Wake up, get dressed, pack your homework, maybe a lunch. That’s the typical
morning routine for most students. But some students on the US-Mexico border
grab something else on their way out the door — their passports. Nineteen-
year-old Arlet Burciaga is one of those students.

![A view of the Colonia Alta Vista neighborhood in Ciudad Juarez. Credit:
Miguel Gutierrez Jr./KUT News. Used with
permission](https://globalvoices.org/wp-
content/uploads/2015/11/LPI-02-800x533.jpg)

A view of the Colonia Alta Vista neighborhood in Ciudad Juarez. Credit: Miguel
Gutierrez Jr./KUT News. Used with permission

Arlet has been awake for more than an hour. She stands in her modest kitchen
in her home in Ciudad Juárez, Mexico. The walls are mostly bare except for a
small sign that reads “Feliz” — Happy. Her mom, Martha Flores Ibarra, counts
pesos.

![Before she leaves, Arlet's mother, Martha Flores Ibarra, arrives home at
6:30 am after working at one of the transnational maquiladora factories
located in Ciudad Juarez.  Credit: Miguel Gutierrez Jr./KUT News. Used with
permission.](https://globalvoices.org/wp-
content/uploads/2015/11/LPI-09-800x533.jpg)

Before she leaves, Arlet's mother, Martha Flores Ibarra, arrives home at 6:30
am after working at one of the transnational maquiladora factories located in
Ciudad Juarez. Credit: Miguel Gutierrez Jr./KUT News. Used with permission.

Martha just got home from an overnight shift at a car parts factory where she
makes about $45 dollars per week. They live with Arlet's younger sister and
older brother, who also works in a factory in Juárez. Martha hands Arlet three
pesos for the bus and four for the bridge toll. She gives her a hug and a
kiss, and Arlet is on her way.

### 6:54 a.m.

![Arlet's passes through Colonia Alta Vista on her way to El Paso, Texas.
Credit: Miguel Gutierrez Jr./KUT News. Used with
permission.](https://globalvoices.org/wp-
content/uploads/2015/11/LPI-12_0-800x533.jpg)

Arlet's passes through Colonia Alta Vista on her way to El Paso, Texas.
Credit: Miguel Gutierrez Jr./KUT News. Used with permission.

Arlet leaves for school.

She lives in Mexico, but her school is in the US — the Lydia Patterson
Institute, a private Methodist school in El Paso. Arlet could go to school in
Mexico, but when she heard through her church about the US high school, she
applied and received a full scholarship. The school also gives her money to
cross the border each day — and $20 per month for other expenses.

### 6:59 a.m.

![Arlet boards a bus towards the international bridge in Ciudad Juarez.
Credit: Miguel Gutierrez Jr./KUT News. Used with
permission.](https://globalvoices.org/wp-
content/uploads/2015/11/LPI-14-800x533.jpg)

Arlet boards a bus towards the international bridge in Ciudad Juarez. Credit:
Miguel Gutierrez Jr./KUT News. Used with permission.

The bus arrives right as Arlet gets to the bus stop. There are very few people
on the streets, but the bus is full of people.

It's a short ride to the bridge and, for Arlet, this daily trip has become the
norm, even though she knows it's anything but. “I don't think it's pretty
normal,” Arlet says, laughing a bit. “I think it's [a] big deal to cross the
bridge every day. It's [a] big experience because every day you never know
what is going to happen in the bridge or during the walk to your house.”

![A line of cars forms down Calle Juarez in the early morning at the Puente
Internacional Paso Del Norte. The cars are waiting to cross the bridge into El
Paso, Texas. Credit: Miguel Gutierrez Jr./KUT News. Used with
permission.](https://globalvoices.org/wp-
content/uploads/2015/11/LPI-19-800x533.jpg)

A line of cars forms down Calle Juarez in the early morning at the Puente
Internacional Paso Del Norte. The cars are waiting to cross the bridge into El
Paso, Texas. Credit: Miguel Gutierrez Jr./KUT News. Used with permission.

Once known as “the murder capital of the world,” Juárez is still recovering
economically from cartel violence between 2009 and 2012. But now, people on
both sides of the border say they feel safe in the city. People who live in El
Paso and Juárez say there is a misconception about life at the border. Despite
current politics surrounding immigration, people constantly flow back and
forth on a daily basis.

Sometimes crossing can be difficult. Security tightens and lines get much
longer when things happen, like the September 11 terrorist attacks and the
Boston Marathon Bombings. Other times, Arlet cannot get through because, like
a normal high schooler, she forgets things, including her passport.

### 7:05 a.m.

![Arlet pays a 4 peso toll in order to exit Mexico and enter the international
bridge towards Texas.  Credit: Miguel Gutierrez Jr./KUT News. Used with
permission.](https://globalvoices.org/wp-
content/uploads/2015/11/LPI-20-800x533.jpg)

Arlet pays a 4 peso toll in order to exit Mexico and enter the international
bridge towards Texas. Credit: Miguel Gutierrez Jr./KUT News. Used with
permission.

Arlet arrives at the toll booth. “Today, there is a lot of line,” she says as
she walks. “I don't know why, but we need to get in the line.” At the bottom
of the bridge, there is a large sign that hangs over the road. “Feliz Viaje,”
she says. “Happy trip or something like that.”

A few years ago, Arlet would've had a tough time translating from Spanish to
English. Before she attended Lydia Patterson she only spoke Spanish and had
never been to the US. “The teachers talked to me and I was like, ‘I don't
understand.’ And it was a very hard, hard moment for me.”

### 7:15 a.m.

Five minutes after she crosses the bridge, Arlet goes through US customs.
Seventy percent of the 435 students at her school cross the border daily. Some
are US citizens who live in Mexico.

Others, like Arlet, are Mexican. Arlet waits in line with her friend, Vicki.
Usually, there is separate a line for students. Today, it's closed.

“It's unfair,” says Vicki. “There aren't many immigrations officials today.”

“Which [line] is moving faster?” Arlet asks. “This one or this one?”

“And they closed the line for students, which is necessary,” Vicki says,
ignoring Arlet.

![Arlet holds her passport and visa. These documents allow her to cross into
the United States and study in El Paso.  Credit: Miguel Gutierrez Jr./KUT
News. Used with permission.](https://globalvoices.org/wp-
content/uploads/2015/11/LPI-34-800x533.jpg)

Arlet holds her passport and visa. These documents allow her to cross into the
United States and study in El Paso. Credit: Miguel Gutierrez Jr./KUT News.
Used with permission.

In front of them, a man is pulled aside. The agent checking his passport takes
him into a separate room. “Maybe he doesn't have the required documentation?”
Arlet wonders. “He's suspicious, I think.”

Another few minutes pass before another agent signals to them and checks their
passports.

“Where you going?” the officer asks.

“Escuela,” Arlet answers.

**Related** : [Global Nation Education](http://www.pri.org/collections/global-
nation-education)

### 7:45 a.m.

![Arlet hands her documents to an immigration officer in El Paso, Texas. This
a regular task for Arlet during the school week.  Credit: Miguel Gutierrez
Jr./KUT News. Used with permission.](https://globalvoices.org/wp-
content/uploads/2015/11/LPI-26-800x533.jpg)

Arlet hands her documents to an immigration officer in El Paso, Texas. This a
regular task for Arlet during the school week. Credit: Miguel Gutierrez
Jr./KUT News. Used with permission.

Arlet passes customs without incident. Once in El Paso, she is on her own. Her
mom doesn’t have a passport and can’t cross the border. If something happens
to Arlet on the US side, her mom couldn’t come and help.

### 7:55 a.m.

![Once at school, Arlet helps herself to breakfast at the school cafeteria.
Students are provided with a breakfast and lunch.  Credit: Miguel Gutierrez
Jr./KUT News. Used with permission.](https://globalvoices.org/wp-
content/uploads/2015/11/LPI-31_0-800x533.jpg)

Once at school, Arlet helps herself to breakfast at the school cafeteria.
Students are provided with a breakfast and lunch. Credit: Miguel Gutierrez
Jr./KUT News. Used with permission.

Arlet arrives at school. Once there, she heads to the cafeteria for breakfast.
Lydia Patterson serves free breakfast and lunch to all its students.

### 8:30 a.m.

![After breakfast, Arlet sits in her first period class, and looks over class
materials.  Credit: Miguel Gutierrez Jr./KUT News. Used with
permission.](https://globalvoices.org/wp-
content/uploads/2015/11/LPI-36-800x533.jpg)

After breakfast, Arlet sits in her first period class, and looks over class
materials. Credit: Miguel Gutierrez Jr./KUT News. Used with permission.

Arlet starts the day in English class. She takes three English courses every
day. This week, she has exams in every subject.

Nearly all of the students at the school graduate and go to college. The
school has strong connections with Methodist colleges across the US. They help
the students navigate the college admissions process and get scholarships.
Socorro de Anda, president of Lydia Patterson, says a college degree could
change Arlet’s life — and her family's, too. “We've seen many, many families
pulled out of poverty because one child has gone through here and has gone
through college,” she says.

### 3:05 p.m.

![Arlet wipes a table at the Lydia Patterson Institute. Her work is part of
her scholarship. Credit: Miguel Gutierrez Jr./KUT News. Used with
permission.](https://globalvoices.org/wp-
content/uploads/2015/11/LPI-41-800x533.jpg)

Arlet wipes a table at the Lydia Patterson Institute. Her work is part of her
scholarship. Credit: Miguel Gutierrez Jr./KUT News. Used with permission.

It's the end of the school day, but Arlet's not done yet. Students work after
school for their scholarships, helping with custodial or clerical work.

### 4:21 p.m.

![After a day of classes, Arlet and fellow classmates walk towards the Paso
Del Norte International Bridge in El Paso.  Credit: Miguel Gutierrez Jr./KUT
News. Used with permission.](https://globalvoices.org/wp-
content/uploads/2015/11/LPI-44-800x533.jpg)

After a day of classes, Arlet and fellow classmates walk towards the Paso Del
Norte International Bridge in El Paso. Credit: Miguel Gutierrez Jr./KUT News.
Used with permission.

Arlet begins her trip back home. After three years of this daily cross-border
commute, Arlet says she is tired, but she knows it is worth it. “I think it is
a blessing of God to my life because it gave me an opportunity to learn a new
culture, the American culture, to [have] new experiences in my life,” she
says.

Now, Arlet is ready for a new journey: off to college. It’s unclear where,
yet. She hopes it’s in the US. If so, she can leave her passport at home.

_Share your thoughts and ideas on Facebook at our[Global Nation
Exchange](https://www.facebook.com/groups/globalnation/), on
Twitter[@globalnation](https://twitter.com/globalnation), or contact us
[here](http://www.pri.org/global-nation-education)._

