!["GOODBYE #FAYADLAW / THANKS, INTERNET!" Graphic created by digital rights
group Contenido Libre, used with
permission.](https://advox.globalvoices.org/wp-content/uploads/2015/11/mex-
Fayadinternet-800x515.jpg)

“GOODBYE #FAYADLAW / THANKS, INTERNET!” Graphic created by digital rights
group Contenido Libre, used with permission.

#### Global Voices Advocacy's Netizen Report offers an international snapshot
of challenges, victories, and emerging trends in Internet rights around the
world.

Mexico’s legislature considered – and then quickly shelved – a cybercrime bill
that critics labeled[ “the worst Internet law in
history.”](https://r3d.mx/2015/10/28/10-puntos-clave-sobre-la-leyfayad-la-
peor-iniciativa-de-ley-sobre-internet-en-la-historia/) The [Law for the
Prevention and Punishment of Information
Crimes](http://www.senado.gob.mx/sgsp/gaceta/63/1/2015-10-27-1/assets/documentos/Inic_PRI_Ley_Delitos_Informaticos.pdf)
was drafted by Senator Omar Fayad of the notoriously power-hungry [PRI
party](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Institutional_Revolutionary_Party) in
collaboration with Mexico’s Federal Police. Known for short as the Fayad law,
it covered most major areas that could be implemented in a law governing the
Internet.

The law contained broad language that conflated everyday computer activities
with criminal acts. For example, the law made it illegal to “…willfully
destroy, disable, damage or perform any act that alters the functioning of a
computer system.” While this may have been intended to target individuals
actively seeking to harm others’ computer systems, the act of “altering the
function of a computer system” could be as simple as running a software update
or changing one’s operating system. The law proposed five to 15 years’ jail
time for this offense.

Another section of the law would have made violations of a a website or app's
terms of service punishable with up to one year in jail and a minimum fine of
800-1000 days’ salary. The incredibly broad scope of this section could have
implicated anyone from an adult inciting violence or sharing pornography on
YouTube to a 12-year-old lying about their age in order to use Facebook.

Most concerning were provisions that defined [“computer
terrorism”](http://es.gizmodo.com/proponen-en-mexico-una-ley-que-quiere-
criminalizar-a-cu-1739524073) as the dissemination of information on the
Internet “with the aim of destabilizing the public peace.” For journalists and
human rights advocates, this had the looks of a policy that would criminalize
the right to free expression online in Mexico. The law also criminalized
various forms of public disclosure of data, measures that critics saw as a
direct attempt to criminalize platforms like
[Mexicoleaks](https://mexicoleaks.mx/).

After thousands of citizens went online and into the streets to express
opposition to the law, [Senator Omar Fayad
withdrew](https://r3d.mx/2015/11/03/gracias-internet-leyfayad-sera-retirada-
del-senado/) it from consideration.

### More fatal attacks on writers in Bangladesh

Two publishing houses in Dhaka, Bangladesh were [violently attacked by armed
assailants](https://advox.globalvoices.org/2015/10/31/bangladesh-book-
publishers-suffer-fatal-attacks-in-wake-of-blogger-killings/), who murdered
one publisher and left two others in serious condition. The brutal attacks are
part of a string of assaults on powerful, secular intellectuals in the
country. Both publishers had ties with Bangladeshi blogger and writer Avijit
Roy, who was hacked to death in public in February 2015. Though the right to
free expression is enshrined in Bangladesh’s constitution, the government has
done little either to discourage the attacks or bring the perpetrators to
justice.

### Iranian student activist arrested

The student activist Amin Anvari has been [arrested and held without
charge](https://advox.globalvoices.org/2015/10/29/iranian-student-held-
without-charge-for-facebook-posts/) in Iran for unclear reasons. According to
family members, he has been pressured to make false confessions. Anvari
received a suspended prison sentence in December 2014 for publishing a post on
Facebook promoting basic civil liberties.

### Facebook vows to maintain ‘real name’ policy, tinker with process

In response to a [public
letter](https://advox.globalvoices.org/2015/10/05/open-letter-facebook-must-
change-its-broken-real-name-policy/) sent to Facebook by Global Voices in
partnership with the Electronic Frontier Foundation, the Association for
Progressive Communications, and the ACLU, the social media company has pledged
to [implement some modest
changes](http://www.buzzfeed.com/alexkantrowitz/facebook-is-making-
enforcement-changes-to-its-real-names-pol) to its “real name policy”, which
requires users to register their profiles under “the name they’re known by in
real life.” Facebook has no plans to do away with the policy, despite
documentation from a wide range of users of the [negative
impact](https://advox.globalvoices.org/2015/10/08/stopped-and-frisked-by-
facebook-real-name-policy-puts-speech-before-privacy/) it has had on their
lives. But the company has promised to make it easier for users to appeal
their decisions on such matters, and to strengthen the process by which users
can flag each other’s accounts for apparent violations of the policy. The
company also announced that “going forward, IDs submitted to Facebook as part
of this process will be encrypted when they are temporarily stored on our
servers,” implying that these documents had been stored insecurely in the
past.

### EU parliament passes watered-down net neutrality bill

The European Parliament [passed a new
bill](http://www.euractiv.com/sections/digital/parliament-green-lights-
roaming-and-net-neutrality-318931) preventing Internet service providers from
blocking Internet traffic, but with carve-outs allowing them to do so when
required by law or necessary to manage congestion. The bill also contains
rules that would enable companies to offer different levels of quality for
‘specialized services’. One day after the bill was passed, Deutsche Telekom
indicated it [plans to ask
startups](http://www.euractiv.com/sections/digital/deutsche-telekom-chief-
causes-uproar-over-net-neutrality-319028) to pay a share of their revenue for
good Internet service, suggesting some telecommunications companies are
already working to exploit loopholes.

### IETF gives Tor a tip of the hat

The Internet Engineering Task Force [formally recognized](https://www.rfc-
editor.org/info/rfc7686) the use of the .onion top level domain name for
hidden services websites accessed through Tor. The move recognizes .onion as a
“special use domain name” used to “provide access to end to end, secure,
anonymized services.” The Tor Project [celebrated the
announcement](https://blog.torproject.org/blog/landmark-hidden-services-onion-
names-reserved-ietf) saying “we think that this is a small and important
landmark in the movement to build privacy into the structure of the Internet.”

### New Research

  * [Ranking Digital Rights 2015 Corporate Accountability Index](https://rankingdigitalrights.org/index2015/)
  * [Beyond the Wall: Mapping Twitter in China](https://cyber.law.harvard.edu/publications/2015/beyond_the_wall) – Berkman Center for Internet and Society

_[**Ellery Roberts
Biddle**](https://advocacy.globalvoicesonline.org/author/ellery-roberts-
biddle/) **, Marianne Diaz Hernandez, James Losey, Taisa Sganzerla and**[
**Sarah Myers
West**](https://advocacy.globalvoicesonline.org/author/sarahbmyers/)
**contributed to this report.**_

### [**Subscribe to the Netizen Report by email**](http://eepurl.com/Y-f11)

