[![ali](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2009/07/ali.gif)](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2009/07/ali.gif)

Yesterday, as _Önər Blog_ [AZ] [reported](http://arazoner.net/blog/?p=502),
the Appellate Court in Baku was to consider again the case of Emin Milli and
Adnan Hajizade, [the recently beaten and detained youth activists and
bloggers](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2009/07/08/azerbaijan-youth-
activists-beaten-and-detained/) sentenced last week to [two months of pre-
trial arrest](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2009/07/11/azerbaijan-youth-
activist-blogger-sentenced-after-trial-behind-closed-doors/) on alleged
“hooliganism” charges.

However, while Emin Milli was brought before the judge, the authorities failed
to bring Adnan Hajizada to the court for unknown reasons. When Hajizada's
lawyer filed a motion demanding that he be present, the judge accepted the
motion and postponed the appeal hearing until 20 July.

With other activists and supporters of the detained men [utilizing social
media](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2009/07/13/azerbaijan-citizen-media-in-
defense-of-detained-activists/) and _YouTube_ to [campaign for their
release](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2009/07/16/azerbaijan-video-campaign-
to-release-detained-activists/), online activity naturally increased.
Yesterday, however, one of the main websites,
[AdnanEmin.com](http://adnanemin.com/), created in their defense [went
down](http://twitter.com/ljmaximus/status/2705715072).

[![website-mod-ready1](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2009/07/website-mod-
ready1.gif)](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2009/07/website-mod-ready1.gif)

According to discussions on _Facebook_ , many suspect that this was because of
a [ping flood](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ping_flood), a denial-of-service
attack (DoS attack), when a website is overwhelmed by ping packets.

![e-i-mod-ready1](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2009/07/e-i-mod-ready1.bmp)

“It is possible that the cite has received unlimited pings and the server
couldn't manage to withstand them.”

Hours later, the site was accessible again.

[![hustlerflower1](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2009/07/hustlerflower1.gif)](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2009/07/hustlerflower1.gif)

_For background info on Emin and Adnan, Global Voices Online has extensive
coverage[here](https://globalvoicesonline.org/found/?cof=FORID:9&q=azerbaijan+emin&btnG=Search+»&cx=000932313665553177304:dg67ra11mvs),
while more information on Emin Milli and Adnan Hajizade can be found
[here](http://videopetition.blogspot.com/2009/07/emins-bio.html) and
[here](http://videopetition.blogspot.com/2009/07/adnans-bio.html). A new
English-language version version of the OL! blog is also [providing
updates](http://ol-en.blogspot.com/)._

