[![cuidemos-el-voto_1246666001459](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2009/07/cuidemos-el-
voto_1246666001459.png)](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2009/07/cuidemos-el-voto_1246666001459.png)A new website is
planning to protect the votes of Mexicans in the elections of July 5 from “old
enemies”: violence, false IDs, ballot rigging, damage to ballot boxes and
other obstacles for transparent elections. “[Cuidemos el
voto](http://www.cuidemoselvoto.org/) [es]” [“Let’s protect the vote”] is a
project following the “citizen journalism” spirit that will watch
discrepancies during the elections through reports from text messages (SMS),
Twitter and its own website.

“Cuidemos el voto” is built on [Ushahidi](http://www.ushahidi.com/), an open-
source platform that allows citizens to send information in a quick and easy
way through cellphones and Internet with the purpose of coverage during
crisis: it collect reports, links, photos and video, and places them on a map
where the information can be filtered. The “motor” has been used recently for
media coverage: in early 2009, news network Al Jazeera [used it for reports on
the war on Gaza](http://labs.aljazeera.net/warongaza/) and later an
independent project [used it for surveillance on swine
flu](http://swineflu.ushahidi.com/).

This is the first formal project of Ushahidi in Latin America. This project in
Mexico was developed by an eclectic team with knowledge of telecommunications,
urban planning and electronic media, with the help of the [Center for Future
Civic Media](http://civic.mit.edu/) of the MIT. Leaders for this project
include Óscar Salazar (from Colima, MX;
[Twitter](http://twitter.com/osalazar)) and Andrés Lajous (from Federal
District, MX, [Twitter](http://twitter.com/andreslajous),
[blog](http://andreslajous.blogs.com/)), with Jorge Soto (Monterrey, MX) and
José Oviedo (Colima, [blog](http://oviedos.com.mx/)). The team helped
[translate the Ushahidi platform into
Spanish](http://blog.ushahidi.com/index.php/2009/06/25/cuidemos-el-voto-
monitoring-federal-elections-in-mexico/), making it easier for other Latin
American teams to organize a similar effort.

“Cuidemos el voto” calls for Mexican citizens to report any irregularity they
witness or they learn through media. Reports can be sent in several ways:

  * Using an electronic form at the website of “[Cuidemos el voto](http://www.cuidemoselvoto.org/) [es]”
  * Sending an text message to SMS number 55-3269-0062 (in Mexico), including electoral section, city or town, and the type of irregularity to be reported
  * Sending an e-mail with same information to reporte@cuidemoselvoto.org
  * Reporting an incident through [Twitter](http://twitter.com/) using the tag [#cuidemoselvoto](http://search.twitter.com/search?q=&ands=&phrase=&ors=&nots=&tag=cuidemoselvoto&lang=all&from=&to=&ref=&near=&within=15&units=mi&since=&until=&rpp=15)

To know more about how to make a better report during Sunday elections, their
article “[How to report
incidents?](http://www.cuidemoselvoto.org/index.php/participate) [es]” gives
some basic tips on recognizing electoral crimes and how to quick-type them
according to their four-letter code.

