Iranian protesters appearing in widely disseminated online photos from the
ongoing [post-election
demonstrations](https://globalvoicesonline.org/specialcoverage/iranian-
election-2009/) in Iran, are now being [targeted on a
website](http://gerdab.ir/fa/pages/?cid=407) of the [Islamic Revolutionary
Guard Corps](http://www.globalsecurity.org/military/world/iran/pasdaran.htm).

The website is called _Gerdab_ (which means ‘vortex’) and belongs to The
Information Center of the Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps for Investigating
Organized Crime. It shows images of 20 people with red circles drawn around
their faces claiming without evidence that they have been involved in creating
“chaos” in Tehran.

Citizens are invited to call or email if they can identify the people on the
photos. _Gerdab_ also claims that two of the people depicted have already been
arrested. The site provides no further information about any of the depicted
people.

Some Islamist bloggers have
[republished](http://09sms.blogfa.com/post-61.aspx) the photos.

Meanwhile, some supporters of the protest movement have themselves published
several photos of Iranian security forces and in particular suspected
[undercover agents ](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Undercover)asking citizens
to help identify them.

For instance, there is [one
photo](http://img1.tinypic.info/files/lz0jcfif8cyisx292ehw.jpg) of a suspected
agent pulling a gun from his belt on the back of a motorcycle. Several
bloggers [published](http://www.1canadian.org/2009/06/blog-post_22.html) the
photo of the suspected agent, asking readers to help identify him. A few days
later, rumors circulated of his name, his position as a [Basij
](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Basij)leader, and a supposed multimillion
dollar bank debt. Information like this is neither fact-checked nor reliable
and can have severe consequences for any one who shares the man's supposed
name. Online rumors easily replace facts.

It would not be the first time that a photo has led to trouble or imprisonment
in a conflict. However, this is a new development in officially sanctioned
stalking and persecution by crowd sourcing information online.

_See Global Voices special coverage page on the[Iranian Elections
2009](https://globalvoicesonline.org/specialcoverage/iranian-election-2009/)._

