For more than a month, Dominicans have been protesting against the proposed
construction of a cement factory in the protected area of [Los Haitises
National Park](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Los_Haitises_National_Park), a
chalky ecosystem with unique characteristics located in the northeastern part
of the Dominican Republic. It has been declared Cultural Patrimony for its
caves, which contains [Taíno](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Taino) art. In
addition, Los Haitises is one of the primary sources of water on the island,
and it estimated that is importance will grow as a strategic reserve because
of its numerous underground currents.

The fragile ecosystem, often known as the lungs of the Caribbean, has been
targeted by the Grupo Estrella as the location for a cement factory, and which
many are concerned about the damage to the natural spaces, as well as flora
and fauna that are in danger of extinction. With other possible locations for
the factory without the rich biodiversity, Luijo of _Ahí e Que Prende [es]_
asks, “[why the insistence of having it in Los Haitises? Why in that place
exactly](http://ahiequeprende.com/2009/05/30/la-controversia-con-la-cementera-
de-los-haitises-¿a-que-intereses-responde/)?”

However, this large company with its headquarters in Santiago, has a strong
economic and commercial impact with its important shares in one of the most
prestigious Dominican universities, and as the owner a national newspaper,
among its other businesses.

In addition, there is official support, and the Environmental Secretary Jaime
David Fernández has avoided the subject and many consider that his reputation
has been damaged. José Méndez of _Monaco [es]_ [calls on the government
official to make a statement about his role in the
matter](http://accioncomunitaria.blogspot.com/2009/05/la-encrucijada-de-jaime-
david.html):

> Jaime David, pedimos que denuncie si está recibiendo presión para ejecutar
> lo que estoy seguro en su interior usted no aprueba en lo mínimo, aunque
> trate de explicarlo

Jaime David, we call on you to denounce if you are receiving pressure to
implement (this project) that I am sure that you actually do not approve of at
all, try to explain it.

[![Photo of protests by José Peguero and used with permission.
http://josepeguero.net](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2009/06/cement.jpg)](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2009/06/cement.jpg)

Photo of protests by José Peguero and used with permission.
http://josepeguero.net

As a result, protests have taken place in the community of Gonzalo, which is
located in Monteplata next to Los Haitises. It was also the scene of violent
confrontations and large protests by residents that do not want the cement
factory.

Online there have also been campaigns to collect signatures for petitions,
Facebook groups, and bloggers and twitterers have also come out against this
proposal. A Twitter account called [Haitises
Park](http://twitter.com/haitisespark) has provided updates on the campaign
saying “We Don't Want Cement in out National Park.” Some of the protests were
organized on blogs, such as the blog [by José Árias
[es]](http://paisdeficcion.blogspot.com/2009/06/las-5-de-esta-tarde-es-la-
protesta.html).

Officials from the Department of Environment has tried to insist that the
cement factory will be placed in a flat area and will not affect the national
park. It has emphasized that there have been wrong ideas that the cement
factory will be in the middle of Los Haitises.

Nevertheless, it appears that these public campaigns have paid off, as a
judicial decision has [ordered the suspension of activities
[es]](http://listindiario.com/app/article.aspx?id=105247) because of potential
environmental damage. Joan Guerrero of _Duarte 101 [es]_ [has reactions from
twitterers upon hearing the news](http://duarte101.com/2009/06/19/suspenden-
la-cementera/).

It was a victory for some, like Joely Rodriguez @JolyRodriguez [celebrates
[es]](https://twitter.com/JolyRodriguez/status/2239258361):

> Dios mio no puedo creerlo! No es mentira… Cuando un pueblo se une, algo pasa
> -No a la Cementera- >>Los trabajos suspendidos inmediatamente

My God, I can't believe it! It is not a lie…. When the people united,
something happens – No to the Cement Factor- >> The construction has been
suspended immediately

