[![Danish Climate Exhibit by UN Climate
Change](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2009/12/world.jpg)](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2009/12/world.jpg)

Image by UN Climate Change http://www.flickr.com/photos/45289935@N08

We bring you some video impressions from people at the [Climate Change
Conference](http://en.cop15.dk/) that took place during the first weeks of
December in Copenhagen, Denmark. From protests, to dances, arts and
presentations, a small sample of COP15.

Through [our special coverage
page](https://globalvoicesonline.org/specialcoverage/copenhagen-climate-
summit-2009/) you were able to see live video from the conference and video
blogs via [TheUptake.org](http://theuptake.org/) and
[OneClimate.net](http://oneclimate.net/) as well as [follow the Global Voices
Team ](https://globalvoicesonline.org/specialcoverage/copenhagen-climate-
summit-2009/)at the conference through their blogs, twitter and other online
media accounts.

Following some other videos showing different experiences people had at the
Climate Change Conference:

[Kiribati](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Kiribati), an island nation in the
Pacific Ocean, sent a delegation to the conference, and here is a[ video of
their cultural presentation](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=1T7P1mwoM0o):

> The delegation from the Republic of Kiribati held a side event on the 9th of
> December 2009 at the UNFCCC COP15 meeting in Copenhagen, where they
> presented how they experience climate change in their daily lives, what they
> are doing to combat it, and their ambitions from the COP15 meeting. Here is
> a cultural item, a traditional dance, performed by I-Kiribati dancer Maria
> Timon.

A 14 year old from Sweden named Tora Gimre, [gave a
speech](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=hKyDb7zDSeI) about where the money to
help stop climate change can be found:

Ecologists from Aragon, Spain get excited about heading out to the Forum from
their hotel, and they recorded a [short video out
](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=n9TN-4fN4l8)in the hotel's lobby:

At the conference itself, outside the Bella Center, there was a protest done
by the [350 initiative](http://www.350.org/cop15#intro) [protesting against
carbon emissions](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=BxeClEyyY3U). With half their
clothes off, they cried that Carbon was not negotiable:

[350 ](http://www.350.org/cop15#intro)also staged [ a freeze action
presentation](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=3dQCqDDeOq4), where youth froze
last Friday at 3:50 pm for 350 seconds to ask climate leaders to keep island
nations in existence by controlling global warming.

What was your favorite action on video from the Climate Change Conference?
Please share it with us!

