[![medellin](http://farm1.static.flickr.com/133/350023280_d153902a83_m.jpg)](http://www.flickr.com/photos/davidpenal/350023280/)In
the [first Rising Voices podcast we visited
Bangladesh](https://www.globalvoicesonline.org/2007/07/24/podcast-intro-to-
the-nari-jibon-project/), where the Nari Jibon center is teaching young women
in Dhaka to express themselves by participating in the online conversation.
This week we are changing the format and releasing this podcast in two
separate parts.

First we become acquainted with Medellín, Colombia; its violent past, its
current tenuous peace, and the mathematician mayor who is comissioning
gigantic modernist libraries in the city's most impoverished neighborhoods.

In the second part of this podcast, which will be published later in the week,
we'll focus on the [HiperBarrio
project](https://wiki.rising.globalvoicesonline.org/Colombia+Intro) and learn
how a few motivated Medellin bloggers are headed to the hills of their city to
teach the tools of citizen media to working class youth.

[display_podcast]

In today's podcast we speak with:

  * [Hector Aristizabal](http://www.pasadenaweekly.com/article.php?id=3389&IssueNum=18), Director of the [ImaginAction](http://www.imaginaction.org/) theater group.
  * [Adam Isacson](http://cipcol.org/), senior associate of the Center for International Policy in Washington, DC.
  * [Aldo Civico](http://www.aldocivico.com/blog/), Director of the Center for International Conflict Resolution at Columbia University in New York City.
  * [Juliana Rincón](http://medeamaterial.blogspot.com/), blogger, [Global Voices author](https://www.globalvoicesonline.org/author/juliana-rincon-parra/), and co-founder of [Medallo Bloguero](http://blogs.medallo.info/).

The introductory background music is “[Madrugada a la Gil
Evans](http://ccmixter.org/media/files/waldhorn33/11246)” by the Paloseco
Brazz Orchestra and was found on [ccMixter](http://ccmixter.org/). The closing
song, “Del Cielo Que Nos Robaron” is by Colombian trova musician [and
blogger](http://www.lizardocarvajal.com/blog/), Lizardo Carvajal. It was
released [under a Creative Commons 2.5
license](http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/2.5/) as part of the
[iSummit 2006 DVD](http://icommons.org/isummit/page.php?pID=14).

As promised in the podcast, here is a YouTube video of Medellin's MetroCable:

It is also worth reading Andres Duque's [thoughts on the
MetroCable](http://blabbeando.blogspot.com/2006/01/medellins-metrocable.html)
and how it has helped transform Medellin.

**Subscribe to the Global Voices podcast using any of the following links:**

[RSS](http://feeds.feedburner.com/globalvoicespodcasts) | [iTunes (podcast
page)](http://phobos.apple.com/WebObjects/MZStore.woa/wa/viewPodcast?id=74941523&s=143441)
| [iTunes (direct subscription
link)](itpc://www.globalvoicesonline.org/-/podcasts/feed/) |
[Odeo](http://odeo.com/channel/106868/view)

