Early last week on May 3rd, amid [widespread debate and
discussion](http://japan.shadowofiris.com/conservatives/constitution-of-japan-
issues-surrounding-revision/) on the topic, Japan celebrated the 60th
anniversary of its constitution. The anniversary comes at a time when
[Japanese citizens and their government are re-evaluating the role of their
current constitution and debating its uniquely pacifist
nature](http://www.asahi.com/english/Herald-asahi/TKY200705030056.html). With
Japan increasingly engaged in combat operations overseas, [notably in
supporting American operations in Iraq](http://warisboring.com/?p=157), the
existence of the country's (ostensibly purely defensive) Self-Defense Forces
(SDF, in Japanese _Jieitai_ ) has come into question time and time again. The
problem, for those unaware of the situation, is that the existence of the SDF,
and the assertive role it is playing internationally as well as
[domestically](https://www.globalvoicesonline.org/2007/05/10/japan-self-
defense-forces-to-be-deployed-to-henoko-local-blogger-issues-a-plea/), run
contrary to the war-renouncing spirit of the current constitution as enshrined
in its preamble and ninth article.

To recap, here is [Article 9 of the Constitution of
Japan](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Article_9_of_the_Constitution_of_Japan):

> 第九条 一
> 日本国民は、正義と秩序を基調とする国際平和を誠実に希求し、国権の発動たる戦争と、武力による威嚇又は武力の行使は、国際紛争を解決する手段としては、永久にこれを放棄する。

ARTICLE 9. (1) Aspiring sincerely to an international peace based on justice
and order, the Japanese people forever renounce war as a sovereign right of
the nation and the threat or use of force as means of settling international
disputes.

> 二 前項の目的を達するため、陸海空軍その他の戦力は、これを保持しない。国の交戦権は、これを認めない。

(2) In order to accomplish the aim of the preceding paragraph, land, sea, and
air forces, as well as other war potential, will never be maintained. The
right of belligerency of the state will not be recognized.

While [Prime Minister Abe Shinzo and the Liberal Democratic Party have long
proclaimed it their goal to revise the
Constitution](http://search.japantimes.co.jp/cgi-bin/nn20070504a1.html), and
in particular Article 9, [the Japanese people are divided on the
topic](http://search.japantimes.co.jp/cgi-bin/nn20070504a1.html). A [survey
conducted by Mainichi shimbun](http://mdn.mainichi-
msn.co.jp/national/news/p20070503p2a00m0na012000c.html) indicated this month
that 51 percent of respondents favoured revision of the constitution. However,
[another poll by Asahi
shimbun](http://www.iht.com/articles/ap/2007/05/02/asia/AS-GEN-Japan-
Constitution-Poll.php) published at around the same time put the Mainichi
figure into context: asked about the pacifist Article 9, 49 percent of
respondents said they wanted to keep it intact, versus 33 percent who wanted
it changed. An indication of the level of support for Article 9 was evidenced
last week in a [Constitution Peace Day
March](http://bkmiller428.blogspot.com/2007/05/constitution-day-peace-
march.html) held in Tokyo's Yoyogi Park, which reportedly attracted 10,000
people.

On May 7th, shortly after Constitution Day, Japan's national broadcaster NHK
aired a program on the history of the constitution and on the question of
constitutional revision. Responses of bloggers to this program give some
indication of the split in opinions among the Japanese population.

Blogger [Tabibito](http://43tabibito.cocolog-
nifty.com/tatuo/2007/05/9_2c41.html) writes:

>
> 7日、NHKで「憲法9条を語れ」と言う番組を放送していました。この中で9条を改正するべきだと言う人の声として、「話合いに応じない国がある。そう言う国に9条は無力だ」と、またある人は「非武装、非戦といっても国民が守られる保証がない、攻めてきた相手から国民を守る為に戦わなければならない」と。そして31歳のフリーターの男性は、自分たちが置かれている現状を変えるために、9条を変えるべきだと行っている。この男性に9条が改正されたら「軍隊に入りますか」と言う質問に、「バイトをするより待遇がよければそれはそれでいいのでは」と答えている。男性は戦争に行くと言う事の意味を深く理解していないようです。

On May 7th, NHK broadcast a TV program called “Talking about Article 9 of the
Constitution”. In this show, people supporting revision of Article 9 said:
“There are countries who will not respond to dialogue. Article 9 is powerless
with respect to such countries.” Other people said: “Even though they are
unarmed and non-combatant, there is no guarantee that citizens will be
protected. When we are assaulted by our opponents, to protect the citizens of
this country, we need to fight.” Next, a 31-year-old man, a freeter, said that
to change the circumstances in which they are in right now, Article 9 should
be changed. When asked the question, if Article 9 is revised, “Would you enter
the military?”, the man replied: “If I was treated better than I am at my
part-time job, then it might be good.” It seems that he doesn't really
understand the meaning of going to war.

>
> 「話合いに応じない国」があるから軍隊が必要だと言っているが、武力を背景にした交渉では何も解決されない。米国はベトナム戦争では撤退を余儀なくされ、イラクでは撤退することもできず、泥沼状態に陥っている。
>
> 他国から攻められた時は国民を守る為に軍隊は必要だと言っているが、自衛の為の戦いは現憲法で認めている事なのです。そのために憲法を改正する必要がないのです。

They say that because there are “countries that do not respond to dialogue”, a
military is necessary, but negotiation backed up by force does not resolve
anything. America withdrew from the Vietnam War out of neccessity, now it
can't withdraw from Iraq and the situation is descending into a quagmire.

They say that a military is necessary to protect this country's citizens when
another country wages war on us, but fighting in the name of self-defense is
permitted by the current constitution. No constitutional revision is needed
for this.

>
> 現憲法では他国を武力攻撃する事を禁じていますが、攻撃された場合は自衛の為に戦う事を認めています。ようするに先に手を出す事はできないが、売られた喧嘩は買うことができるのです。

