Thanks to a New York Times article entitled [“The Soul of
Morocco”](http://travel.nytimes.com/2007/04/08/travel/08Fez.html?ex=1176782400&en=59ef0491040ae20d&ei=5070&emc=eta1),
the Moroccan blogosphere is busy debating the truth in this statement.
[Fez](http://www.answers.com/topic/fes-morocco), a city of approximately 1
million, is known as Morocco's most refined city. As the home of the Qarouyine
University, one of the world's oldest and prestigious, its reputation is not
unearned.

However, in a country with such a rapidly changing and growing economy, many
of Fez's residents have been left behind.

> “Right now, today, in 2007, Fez is also a ghetto in every sense of the word
> and most of its inhabitants are barely eking out a miserable subsistence
> living,” [says](http://everythingmorocco.blogspot.com/2007/04/two-sides-of-
> fez-medina.html) [Everything
> Morocco](http://everythingmorocco.blogspot.com/), a foreigner living in the
> ancient Fez medina (town).

[  
The Morocco Report](http://www.moroccosavvy.com/taamarbuuta)‘s taamarbuuta
questions the authenticity of Fez, saying “Fez may look like a jewel in an
abyss of globalisation, but where is the authenticity in these tourist-
pouncing Fassis?” (April 9, 2007, “[The soul of
Morocco?](http://www.moroccosavvy.com/taamarbuuta/2007/04/09/the-soul-of-
morocco/)” to which [The View from Fez](http://riadzany.blogspot.com) rebuts
with a post entitled “[Fez versus Meknes – ‘tourist -pouncing
Fassis?](http://riadzany.blogspot.com/2007/04/fez-versus-meknes-tourist-
pouncing.html)‘” and challenging local readers to visit Fez.

Liosliath, of the blog [Morocco Time](http://liosliath.com/blog), [takes
issue](http://liosliath.com/blog/?p=220) with Fez being named the country's
soul, saying “There’s still a lot of ‘authentic’ Morocco to be found outside
the main tourist areas.”

![touche-pas-a-mon-pays.JPG](/wp-content/uploads/2007/04/touche-pas-a-mon-
pays.JPG)

Also on the lips of Moroccan bloggers are the recent suicide bombings in
Casablanca. After one man, Abdelfattah Raydi, blew himself up in a Casablanca
internet cafe, the police went after his compatriots and on Tuesday, were
close to catching several when one detonated a bomb underneath his clothing.
Police shot another, and a third (who turned out to be Raydi's brother,
Ayyoub) detonated a bomb, killing himself and a policeman, and injuring
several, including a young boy. On Saturday morning, two more men blew
themselves up on Blvd. Moulay Youssef in Casablanca, where the American
Consulate is located.

[‘Aqoul](http://www.aqoul.com) blogger Lounsbury
[commends](http://www.aqoul.com/archives/2007/03/encore_rock_the.php) Mohammed
Faiz, the owner of the internet cafe where Abdelfattah Raydi first detonated
his bomb (and whose cafe is know wreckage, leaving his already poor family
even more destitute), requesting that anyone with ideas contact him to
facilitate a fund for Faiz and his family.

Moroccan blogger [Big World Learner](http://bigworldlearner.blogspot.com/)
exclaims, “Blood, terror, mutilated bodies, young people blowing themselves up
in public places!! It’s always difficult to believe that these things are
happening in our country!” (April 12, 2007, “[Misleading
terror](http://bigworldlearner.blogspot.com/2007/04/misleading-terror.html)“)

[Bo18](http://bo18.blogspot.com/2007/04/two-dead-in-morocco-terror-raid.html),
a blogger of the Moroccan diaspora asks concisely, “No seriously, its getting
a bit out of hand. Don't you think as well?”

