The invitation to blog about a live event at the UN was unprecedented. This
was the first time that bloggers were given a reserved area in the press room,
with a clear view of the humongous screen partitioned into 4 parts, one for
each channel that you can tune into with the classic [UN white ear
piece](http://gadgets.boingboing.net/2007/09/24/how-should-the-un-ta.html).  
[![Press room displays at the
UN](http://farm2.static.flickr.com/1043/1437708811_58961e55c1_m.jpg)](http://www.flickr.com/photos/afropicmusing/1437708811/
"Photo Sharing")  
We got the specifics on who will be chairing which plenary and were even able
to attend some of the plenary meetings in their respective halls. I later
found out that the word plenary means meeting, so in effect we were attending
a ‘meeting, meeting’, though not in the sense that we think of a meeting. It
apparently goes [further](http://m-w.com/dictionary/plenary) i.e “…fully
attended or constituted by all entitled to be present”. This is not the only
word that seemed like “UN speak” there was also ‘capacity building’ and
‘knowledge transfer’ Many of the leaders in the sessions I attended used these
key words repeatedly. Hearing similar words (in succession too) made you think
you were listening to a broken cd player.

Back to the word plenary and its meaning, it includes the idea of entitlement
of those present to fully participate and have their say. It helped to talk to
and ask the UN foundation communication officers about the format of the
meeting because it is very easy to get completely bored and think that there
is repetition between delegates speeches that it the whole exercise does not
make any sense at all. Is this a conversation? Parallel conversations? What
about the themes? Adaptation, Technology, mitigation, financing? I was not
sure what to expect when attending the meetings, but i can tell you this. The
words in the themes appeared to have been inserted into prepared speeches. I
kept on hoping to hear concrete examples of how countries have been adapting
to climate change, and thought that it would be the focus of the meeting. What
i got were snippets of examples from a few leaders like the [PM of
Netherlands](http://webcast.un.org/ramgen/ondemand/conferences/climatechange/2007/070924plenary1am-
eng.rm?start=01:35:56&end=01:42:20) and the [PM of
Mauritius](http://webcast.un.org/ramgen/ondemand/conferences/climatechange/2007/070924plenary1am-
eng.rm?start=01:48:07&end=01:57:05) amongst a few others. To be fair, the
challenges of adapting to climate were succinctly enumerated by many leaders
from Africa, including appeals for funds to ‘build capacity’, and perhaps
countries have not formally figured out how to adapt to climate change. The
format of the talks is clearly classic UN. It wouldn't be the UN if each
country did not have a say, though you can't help but wonder if what is
happening is a real conversation. Strangely, I came away thinking that perhaps
its a different type of talk that one would have to get used to and,
[decipher](http://www.prospect.org/csnc/blogs/tapped_archive?month=09&year=2007&base_name=post_5059).
Is the December meeting in Bali going to be a real conversation about what the
next steps are in dealing with climate change?

One thing that is undeniable is the passion and commitment of the Secretary
General Ban Ki Moon to get the leaders of the world to really act to respond
to climate change. I would highly recommend watching his [opening remarks
](http://www.un.org/apps/news/infocus/sgspeeches/statments_full.asp?statID=121)
and reading the summary. In addition , depending on which country you are
interested in, the UN news center has been excellent in [posting
videos](http://www.un.org/webcast/climatechange/highlevel/index.asp?go=b070924)
of the sessions online. [Note that you would have to download Real player].  
The [speakers from Plenary
I](http://www.un.org/webcast/climatechange/highlevel/index.asp?go=b070924) on
adaptation were from the following countries:Argentina, Guatemala, Micronesia
(Federated States Of), Czech Republic, Cyprus, Honduras, Zambia, Ghana,
Angola, Thailand, Madagascar, Nigeria, Italy, Netherlands, Republic Of Korea,
Mauritius, Bangladesh, Andorra, Spain, and Guinea. I would start with the
speeches from Netherlands, Ghana, Zambia, Nigeria.  
[This ideo The Czech
Republic](http://webcast.un.org/ramgen/ondemand/conferences/climatechange/2007/070924plenary1am-
eng.rm?start=00:29:32&end=00:37:15) was a small highlight for me. The
president thinks the debate on climate change is one sided, and presents some
arguments to debunk global warming. At the 7 minute mark, he details his
recommendations with some humor thrown in for good measure. His
recommendations are [definitely
arguable](http://www.worldpublicopinion.org/pipa/articles/home_page/412.php?lb=hmpg1&pnt=412&nid=&id=),
but not his comedic timing.

All in all the ‘Live at the UN’ experience was like i mentioned above,
unprecedented. As the UN figures out [‘how to talk to
blogs’](http://gadgets.boingboing.net/2007/09/24/how-should-the-un-ta.html),
and bloggers like myself figure out how to cover the UN, It appears that blog
coverage would add value to future UN talks. One thing for sure is that the UN
has made the first step towards making the proceedings even more relevant by
embracing the blogging medium as a tool in reaching out to people around the
world.

My sincere thanks to the [UN foundation staff
](http://betterworldcampaign.org/)and the other incredibly cool (solar back
pack carrying, moleskine toting, mac lugging) bloggers. Stay tuned to [‘Live
from the UN’](http://www.undispatch.com/livefromtheun.php)!

