[São Tomé and
Príncipe](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/S%C3%A3o_Tom%C3%A9_and_Pr%C3%ADncipe),
like other islands in the Gulf of Guinea such as Bioko and Pagalu, is one of
the countries on the West African coast that stands out when the issue at hand
is biodiversity. For this reason, since the end of the 19th century these
“beautiful equatorial islands” have attracted enormous interest from
[international
researchers](http://www.obopark.com/pt/saotomeprincipe/nationalparks/conservation.html)
[pt].

Their forests have been classified by the international organisation
[WWF](http://worldwildlife.org/ecoregions/at0127) as one of the two hundred
most important areas in the world in terms of biodiversity. They are the
habitat for around 25 species of endemic birds, an extraordinary number and
[comparable](http://www.stp-parks.org/fauna) [pt] to the “Galapagos
Archipelago (22 species), which is eight times larger than São Tomé and
Príncipe, and more than double the number of the Seychelles (11 species),
which are slightly smaller than São Tomé and Príncipe”.

[![Beija-flor-oliváceo - Cyanomitra
olivacea](https://pt.globalvoicesonline.org/wp-content/uploads/2012/10/aves-
sao-
tome-375x250.jpg)](http://saotomeaminhahistoria.blogspot.pt/2012/09/trabalho-
de-campo-no-principe.html)

The Olive Sunbird – Cyanomitra olivacea. Photo from the blog Apenas a Minha
História (used with permission)

In the nineties, Birdlife International included the São Tomé and Príncipe
forests in Africa's “[Important Bird Areas
(IBAs)](http://www.africanbirdclub.org/countries/SaoTome/ibas.html)“, located
in the top 25% of the 218 “Endemic Bird Area (EBAs)” in the world.

Making the country a world reference for
[birds](http://www.obopark.com/pt/saotomeprincipe/birdwatching.html) [pt],
which are unarguably the most obvious representatives of the immense
biological wealth, the islands have been a constant cause for celebration and
appreciation, as is the case in the newspaper [Jornal Quercus
Ambiente](http://jornal.quercus.pt/scid/subquercus/defaultarticleViewOne.asp?categorySiteID=357&articleSiteID=1761)
[pt], where Martim Pinheiro de Melo affirmed in an article:

> As ilhas de São Tomé e Príncipe no Golfo da Guiné teriam certamente
> fascinado Darwin se ele por lá tivesse passado.

The São Tomé and Príncipe islands in the Gulf of Guinea would have definitely
fascinated Darwin if he had gone there.

It was precisely in search of the allure, magic and splendour which the
“beautiful equatorial islands” offer visitors with open arms that Portuguese
biologist João Pedro Pio went to southwestern São Tomé in [July
2012](http://saotomeaminhahistoria.blogspot.pt/2012/07/agripalma-vergonha-de-
sao-tome.html) [pt], to Ribeira Peixe to be exact. His intention was to find
birds (the Island Bronze-naped Pigeon, São Tomé Green Pigeon and Maroon
Pigeon) and other rare species in danger of extinction, as is the case for the
[Ibis](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/S%C3%A3o_Tom%C3%A9_Ibis), which is at the
top of the [list](http://www.obopark.com/pt/saotomeprincipe/birdwatching/bird-
checklist.html) [pt] as one of the critically endangered endemic birds.

The blog [Apenas a minha história](http://saotomeaminhahistoria.blogspot.pt/)
[pt], where João Pedro relates his experiences over the course of a year as a
foreigner and researcher in São Tomé, describes the scene of devastation he
found in the area where it should have still been possible to see the birds:

> Bem, quando o transecto começou, numa zona que anteriormente seria floresta
> cerrada, agora era um descampado enlameado. Já não haviam árvores nenhumas!
> Foram todas cortadas indiscriminadamente (…) com a excepção de um ou outro
> Viru-vermelho que permanecia comicamente sozinho no meio de toda aquela
> destruição, não havia uma única árvore de pé.

Well, when the transect started, in an area that used to be closed forest, it
became a muddy clearing. There were already no trees at all! They had all been
cut down indiscriminately (…) with the exception of one or two _Viru-vermelho_
remaining comically alone in the middle of all that destruction, there wasn't
a single tree standing.

[!["Ao longe uma escavadora fazia o seu trabalho implacavelmente enquanto toda
a paisagem parecia chorar a destruição
causada."](https://pt.globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2012/08/agripalma-
stp.jpg)](http://apenasaminhahistoria.blogspot.pt/2012/07/agripalma-vergonha-
de-sao-tome.html)

“In the distance a bulldozer works ruthlessly while the whole landscape seems
to cry at the destruction.” (Image used with permission.)

Ribeira Peixe, also called [Emolve ](http://pt.wikipedia.org/wiki/Emolve)[pt]
(after the vegetable oil company), was a large semi-abandoned oil palm
plantation, a monoculture that always presented a danger to the island's
biodiversity, a danger aggravated above all by the threat to go ahead with
plans to rehabilitate and expand the plantation from the current 610 hectares
to approximately 5,000 hectares, [a fact
confirmed](http://www.telanon.info/economia/2011/12/16/9293/americo-ramos-foi-
o-subscritor-do-acordo-entre-o-estado-sao-tomense-e-o-grupo-belga-para-
exploracao-de-oleo-de-palma-nas-duas-ilhas/) [pt] in 2009 when the São Tomean
State signed an agreement with Belgian company SOCFINCO for palm oil
operation.

João Pedro created the following map of the area:

[!["A linha verde assinala o limite com o Parque Natural Obô. Toda a área
vermelha é antiga plantação de palmeira ou floresta que eu já vi que foi
cortada. Como podem ver, há muita floresta que dantes estava de pé juntamente
com as palmeiras da Emolve e agora perdeu-
se..."](https://pt.globalvoicesonline.org/wp-content/uploads/2012/08/mapa-
emolve-stp.jpg)](http://apenasaminhahistoria.blogspot.pt/2012/07/agripalma-
vergonha-de-sao-tome.html)

“The green line marks the border with the Obô National Park. The whole red
area is old palm plantation or forest that I have already seen has been cut
down. As you can see, there is a lot of forest that used to stand together
with the Emolve palms and has now been lost…”

The young researcher wrote that “the Government decided that it would be more
profitable for the country to swap all its biodiversity, which is unique in
the world, for a few tons of oil”:

> O governo de São Tomé e Príncipe assinou um contrato com a Agripalma,
> cedendo-lhes 5000 ha, ou seja, terra suficiente para que o negócio de venda
> de óleo de palma se torne rentável. (…) E como se o Ibis e as outras aves
> endémicas presentes na zona não fossem suficientes para parar o abate
> descontrolado de árvores, é aqui que se pode observar o fantástico Pico do
> Cão Grande que, só por si, poderia e devia ser explorado como um foco de
> atracção turística importantíssimo para São Tomé e Príncipe! Mas não (…)

The São Tomé and Príncipe Government signed a contract with Agripalma giving
them 5000 ha, in other words, enough land so that the business of selling palm
oil would become cost-effective. (…) And as if the Ibis and other endemic
birds in the area were not enough reason to stop the uncontrolled logging, it
is here that the fantastic Pico do Cão Grande [Great Dog Peak] mountain can be
seen by itself; it could and should be explored as an important tourist
attraction for São Tomé and Príncipe! But no (…)

The former International Coordenator of the [World Rainforest
Movement](http://www.wrm.org.uy/), [Ricardo
Carerre](http://www.wrm.org.uy/boletin/170/En_memoria_de_Ricardo_Carrere.html)
[es], in the report titled “[Oil palm in Africa: Past, present and future
scenarios](http://wrm.org.uy/countries/Africa/Oil_Palm_in_Africa.pdf)”
explains the processes that led to the
[50](http://www.portalangop.co.ao/motix/pt_pt/noticias/africa/Consorcio-
frances-investe-milhoes-dolares-producao-oleo-
palma,ab34d521-7844-4d20-99cd-898f99a778f6.html) –
[75](http://www.jornaldigital.com/noticias.php?noticia=19976) [pt – both
links] million dollar deal in exchange for priceless riches.

São Tomé and Príncipe is one of the signatories of the [Convention on
Biological
Diversity](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Convention_on_Biological_Diversity)
and has committed to finding solutions for the preservation of biodiversity.
However, citizens and Internet users alike ask themselves if perhaps a study
or evaluation has been carried out by a qualified entity on the environmental
impact that this monoculture system will have in both the short and long term.

The palm oil may be used for the production of “biofuel” for commercial
purposes, but these palm plantations aggressively degrade the environment,
absorbing the soil's nutrients and leaving it extremely poor until, in less
than two decades, it becomes totally barren land, serving only for scrub
growth, which is perfect fuel for fires. Furthermore, the factories that
emerge to process this oil typically produce a large amount of contaminating
waste, represented by husks, water and fat residues and, as it is presumably a
monoculture, it will need a large amount of herbicides, fertilizers and
pesticides.

There is the saying “learn from others’ mistakes”, and the benefit of history
is that we can learn to not make the same mistake. In
[Indonesia](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2011/11/01/indonesia-impact-of-oil-
palm-plantations/) and
[Malaysia](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2010/03/21/malaysia-whats-the-real-
deal-with-palm-oil/), for example, entire forests have disappeared with palm
oil operations, as if they had never even existed. Close to two million
hectares of forest are destroyed annually and the exploitation in question
only seems to benefit large farming operations and corrupt governments, the
weakest can only look the other way, an occurrence that has been spreading in
other developing regions in the world.

