Just over a year
[since](http://chinadigitaltimes.net/2006/09/interview_father_of_chinas_water_pollution_map_china_di.php)
their [first](http://www.ipe.org.cn/index.jsp) [zh]
[mashup](http://www.programmableweb.com/api/google-maps/mashups) was released,
the Institute of Public and Environmental Affairs (IPE), headed by journalist-
environmentalist [Ma Jun](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ma_Jun), has just
released its [Air Pollution Map](http://air.ipe.org.cn/qyInfo.do?qybh=0) [zh],
complete with its own [BBS](http://www.ipe.org.cn/onet/bbs/) and space for
[feedback forum](http://air.ipe.org.cn/gczc/gczc.jsp).

Based on [official
statements](https://www.globalvoicesonline.org/2007/06/01/china-pollution-in-
tai-hu/) and [public
records](https://www.globalvoicesonline.org/2007/07/12/china-750000-annual-
pollution-deaths/) of [pollution
incidents](https://www.globalvoicesonline.org/2005/11/28/china-wate-crisis-in-
harbin/) dating back to 2004, 40 of the 4,000 corporations the
[mashup](http://www.programmableweb.com/api/google-maps/mashups)
[fingers](http://chinadigitaltimes.net/2007/12/global_giants_on_pollution_blacklist_wang_zhuoqiong.php)
are [foreign-owned
multinationals](http://www.chinadialogue.net/blog/show/single/en/1569-Chinese-
NGO-reveals-air-pollution-blacklist).

  
_Video uploaded to 56.com by user feihe in May this year and shot on the
outskirts of Beijing._

A step toward making pollution economically unsustainable for offending
corporations, or just another way to postpone fixing China's pervasive
pollution problems? The environment has been a steady topic in [prominent
parts](http://www.danwei.org/environmental_problems/citizens_opinions_on_the_xiame.php)
of the blogsphere this year and the air pollution map made [no small
splash](http://www.google.com/search?hl=en&q=%22%E7%A9%BA%E6%B0%94%E6%B1%A1%E6%9F%93%E5%9C%B0%E5%9B%BE%22&btnG=Google+Search)
on the internet over the weekend.

Judging from this Dec. 14 post, is it possible the indie blogger _‘Picturesque
Darkness’_ has [only just heard](http://xltbj.com/blog/?p=106) of IPE's
existence?

> 环境是人类赖以生存的根本，但一些企业、商家、甚至跨国企业为了效益，根本不管不顾。除了领导及相关责任人的玩忽职守之外 ，国家管理机构为什么没有治理，
> 我们的法律 法规还是跟不上发展的步伐。领导的意识要走在前面。
>
>
> 此外，大家应该理性的思考问题，对关于自己和子孙后代切身利益的问题。要敢于为自己说话。我们虽不能做什么大事情，但是群众的力量是不可小觑的，支持一下这家民间组织（公众与环境研究中心）作点力所能及的事情，声援、或者捐款。方式众多，量力而行。对于那些不负责任的企业、公司进行谴责、声讨。他们会感觉到压力的、政府会感觉到压力的。从量变会发展到质变。请大家一起努力。再次感谢公众与环境研究中心、感谢他们敢于说实话。敢于面对各方压力。祝公众与环境研究中心越来越权威，越来越有威慑力。

The environment is what humans depend on for survival, but some corporations,
businesspeople, and even multinational corporations, in the name of
efficiency, completely overlook it altogether. Unless our leaders and
respective officials have fallen asleep at the wheel, why haven't state
management institutions brought this under control? Because our laws and
regulations remain unable to keep up with development, and the leaders think
only of being at the forefront.

