![](https://globalvoices.org/wp-content/uploads/2017/03/raidalerts.jpg)

‘RedadAlertas’, an app that tells you where there are raids against
immigrants. Credit: Courtesy Conexión Migrante

_This story by[David Leveille](https://www.pri.org/people/david-leveille)
originally[ ](http://www.pri.org/people/meradith-hoddinott)[appeared on
PRI.org](https://www.pri.org/stories/2017-02-28/immigration-raid-alerts-are-
coming-soon-your-smartphone) on February 28, 2017. It is republished here as
part of a partnership between PRI and Global Voices._

No abra la puerta! Don't open the door!

That may be the No. 1 piece of advice activists have for the estimated 11
million undocumented immigrants living in the United States, many of whom fear
possible deportation. If the authorities come knocking without a proper
warrant, US residents [have a
right](https://www.pri.org/stories/2017-02-15/how-undocumented-immigrant-
brought-us-child-getting-ready-trumps-immigration) not to open the door.

Advance notice of when an immigration raid on a workplace is about to go down
certainly helps, too.

Now there's an app for that, focused on serving Spanish-speaking undocumented
immigrants. It's called “RedadAlertas” — or RaidAlerts.

“Well, it doesn't work yet. It’s still in development,” says Arizona-based
software developer Celso Mireles. “But the way it would work, right now, is we
want people to be able to sign up for alerts about raids near them and another
group of people that will serve to report and verify the alerts.”

Mireles is part of a team of open-source developers, technology activists and
volunteers who are creating the crowdsourcing app.

The RedadAlertas project came out of discussions over the years among people
involved in immigrant rights work. “We were brainstorming about how technology
can help the undocumented community and this is one of those ideas that was
born out of that conversation,” says Mireles.

The app focuses on identifying immigration checkpoints and possible workplace
raids. And Mireles is anticipating that those kinds of raids will be happening
more often.

Among President Donald Trump's executive orders from January [calls for the
hiring of 10,000 more immigration
officials](https://www.pri.org/stories/2017-02-10/19-realdonaldtrump-you-plan-
hire-10000-more-immigration-officers-are-you-also). At least one White House
draft memo, [obtained and publicly released by the Associated
Press](http://hosted.ap.org/dynamic/stories/U/US_TRUMP_NATIONAL_GUARD?SITE=AP&SECTION=HOME&TEMPLATE=DEFAULT),
showed the Department of Homeland Security considered deploying 100,000
National Guard troops to apprehend millions of undocumented immigrants in 11
US states. (The White House [denied the
report](http://www.latimes.com/politics/washington/la-na-essential-washington-
updates-white-house-denies-report-that-trump-is-1487348685-htmlstory.html).)
That kind of strategy would likely include raids on workplaces such as
factories and farms that employ migrant workers, and sweeps of locations where
day laborers meet up. It could also include traffic stops in which drivers are
required to show a license and identification to pass. Mireles believes it is
possible that immigration agents could conduct “blanket raids by walking
neighborhoods.”

“It's unprecedented now but I think there are a lot of unprecedented things
happening,” he says. “So this is really preparation for a much higher
escalation of oppression of undocumented immigrants in the United States.”

Which is not to say Mireles is trying to make people afraid. He wants the
information in the app to do the opposite. It will not, for example, alert
people to individual home raids, where immigration agents arrive on doorsteps.
That would not be helpful, he says, and “would probably only serve to increase
the fear in the community which is what this app is just trying to quell.”

There may also be a legal risk incurred by developing software tools that
allow undocumented immigrants to evade the law or impede law enforcement
efforts. But so far, Mireles says the developers haven't received complaints.

“Nobody from ICE [Immigration and Customs Enforcement] has contacted me and
there are volunteer lawyers involved right now with the legal expertise in
terms of privacy concerns and the legalities so I think we are well within the
means of the law,” he says.

Users are already anxious to download the app, Mireles says. Some have
suggested that the raid alerts should be available in languages besides
Spanish, to be useful to as many immigrants as possible. [About 13 percent of
undocumented immigrants come from countries in
Asia](http://www.migrationpolicy.org/data/unauthorized-immigrant-
population/state/US), according to estimates by the Migration Policy
Institute. [RedadAlertas is inviting volunteer translators to help expand
access](https://github.com/Cosecha/redadalertas/wiki/FAQ). It's also open-
source software.

“Technology is advancing very quickly, and I'm interested in bringing that
type of energy to the immigrant rights movement. We hear a lot of things like,
‘Well, you know, undocumented immigrants are loathe to adopt technology,’ and,
‘We need to think about accessibility.’ While some of that may be true, there
are also studies that show, for example, that the Latino market is one of the
early adopters,” he says.

“Of course we already see law enforcement using technology like a [stingray to
disable communications](http://www.citylab.com/crime/2017/02/cellphone-spy-
tools-have-flooded-local-police-departments/512543/) at peaceful protests,”
says Mireles. But activists are accustomed to adapting. “I think we're trying
to be aware of that as developers and just try to architect the tools so that
it doesn't compromise and doesn't just create a nice tempting target for the
government to infiltrate.”

