[![](https://globalvoices.org/wp-
content/uploads/2019/01/47162492_2114526851994100_9048339324835201024_o-800x450.jpg)](https://www.instagram.com/p/BsVkAy6HFaQ/)

Image: Napachie Pootoogook's “Lost in Storm” from the Kenojuak Cultural Centre
and Print Shop. Used with permission by QIA. See [here for the Instagram
link.](https://www.instagram.com/p/BsVkAy6HFaQ/)

The Qikiqtani Inuit Association (QIA) has taken to social media to encourage
the increased usage of [Inuktitut](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Inuktitut),
the Inuit language. Based in the Qikiqtani (Baffin) Region of
[Nunavut](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Nunavut), Canada’s youngest territory,
the organization works to “safeguard, administer and advance the rights and
benefits of the Qikiqtani Inuit”.

Their social media efforts are in keeping with their
[mission](https://qia.ca/about-us/) to promote the Inuktitut language. In an
email interview with QIA, a representative of the organization wrote:

> Language preservation is an integral part of building pride among Inuit,
> particularly young Inuit. Learning, speaking-in and thinking-in Inuktitut
> helps young Inuit feel more connected to our community and traditional
> values.

This is especially important because [researchers
note](https://www.ctvnews.ca/canada/nunavik-group-fights-inuktitut-language-s-
possible-demise-1.1356973) “a decline in the quality of Inuktitut in Nunavik —
including poor grammar, a low level of vocabulary and increased mixing of
Inuktitut with English.” According to the researchers’ report, contributing
factors may include the influence of non-Inuktitut-language media and an
insufficient number of teachers fluent in Inuktitut.

According to information collected from [various
sources](http://www.endangeredlanguages.com/lang/ike) by the Endangered
Languages Project, there are between 14,000 and 30,000 native speakers of
Inukutit, but the language is considered to “vulnerable” according to
[UNESCO's Atlas of the World’s Languages in
Danger](http://www.unesco.org/languages-atlas/).

The online campaign being conducted on
[Instagram](https://www.instagram.com/Qikiqtani_Inuit/),
[Twitter](https://twitter.com/Qikiqtani_Inuit), and
[Facebook](https://www.facebook.com/QikiqtaniInuit), introduces Inuktitut
words written in [Canadian Aboriginal
syllabics](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Canadian_Aboriginal_syllabics) and
pairs them with prints produced by the [Kenojuak Cultural Centre and Print
Shop](http://kenojuakcentre.ca/) in Cape Dorset. The illustrations illuminate
many aspects of Inuit culture.

The Word of the Day project is another of several initiatives designed to
promote the language. The QIA sponsors an annual Inuktitut song and poem
contest, as well as the production of early childhood education materials. In
collaboration with [Inhabit Media](https://inhabitmedia.com/), an Inuit-owned
publishing company based in Nunavut, the QIA produces children’s books
authored by Inuit authors from the territory.

> [
> ](https://www.instagram.com/p/BgEH5I2nMIt/?utm_source=ig_embed&utm_medium=loading)

