[![Finding safe drinking water is difficult in the Batken region of
Kyrgyzstan. Due to the many dams nearby, rivers dry up, and people find
themselves forced to fight for every drop of water.
](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2014/06/02-FS_LR_Water-2_inline1.jpg)](http://creativetimereports.org/2014/06/17/kyrgyzstan-
conflicts-foreshadow-water-wars/)

Finding safe drinking water is difficult in the Batken region of Kyrgyzstan.
Due to the many dams nearby, rivers dry up, and people find themselves forced
to fight for every drop of water. Photo by Fyodor Savintsev / Salt Images,
2012. Copyright: Creative Time Reports, used with permission.

_The original version of this piece was first published on[Creative Time
Reports](http://creativetimereports.org/2014/06/17/kyrgyzstan-conflicts-
foreshadow-water-wars/). Photos_ _by Fyodor Savintsev, text by[Katya Kazbek
](http://creativetimereports.org/author/katya-kazbek/)and Global Voices
Central Asia Editor [Chris
Rickleton.](https://globalvoicesonline.org/author/chris-rickleton/)_

Today 780 million people lack access to drinking water. The lack of this
precious resource in Central Asia, not only traps people in situations of dire
need and sanitary hazard; it also foreshadows the rise of “water wars”—cross-
border skirmishes over access to water that aggravate ecological strife and
give the region sharp political overtones.

![Kurambaev Almaz, 69, lives with his wife more than 100 miles away from the
nearest town in Kyrgyzstan’s Osh Province. Almaz travels by donkey into the
mountains to find drinking water. Photo by Fyodor Savintsev / Salt Images,
2008.](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2014/06/15-FS_LR_Water-2-4-1.jpg)

Kurambaev Almaz, 69, lives with his wife more than 100 miles away from the
nearest town in Kyrgyzstan’s Osh Province. Almaz travels by donkey into the
mountains to find drinking water. Photo by Fyodor Savintsev / Salt Images,
2008. Copyright: Creative Time Reports, used with permission.

By 2030 [nearly
half](http://www.aljazeera.com/indepth/features/2011/06/2011622193147231653.html)
the world’s population will inhabit areas of “high water stress,” according to
the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development.

Central Asia is divided into water-rich upstream and water-poor downstream
states. The fact that Tajikistan and Kyrgyzstan, the upstream countries, have
the two weakest economies in the region might be seen as nature’s way of
offsetting material poverty with ecological abundance. Still, the balance of
resources in Central Asia is far from a happy one. Currently some Kyrgyz
lawmakers are toying with the idea of cutting the flow of water to semi-arid
Uzbekistan, the nation with the region’s largest population and standing army,
after Uzbekistan cut gas supplies to Kyrgyzstan’s southern city of Osh in
April.

![View of the road through Kyrgyzstan’s Kalmak-Ashu Pass, which is more than
two miles above sea level.](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2014/06/13-FS_LR_Water-inline.jpg)

View of the road through Kyrgyzstan’s Kalmak-Ashu Pass, which is more than two
miles above sea level. Photo by Fyodor Savintsev / Salt Images, 2008.
Copyright: Creative Time Reports, used with permission.

Uzbekistan’s decision to cut Osh’s gas may well have its origins in a long-
running water dispute. Officials in Tashkent, the capital of Uzbekistan, are
aghast at Kyrgyz and Tajik plans to build giant hydroelectric dams upstream of
the Syr Darya and Amu Darya rivers.

![A family drinks water from a pipe jutting out of the mountains in the Naryn
region of Kyrgyzstan. Photo by Fyodor Savintsev / Salt Images,
2013.](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2014/06/12-FS_LR_Water-1-2.jpg)

A family drinks water from a pipe jutting out of the mountains in the Naryn
region of Kyrgyzstan. Photo by Fyodor Savintsev / Salt Images, 2013.
Copyright: Creative Time Reports, used with permission.

Uzbekistan relies on these water sources for its strategically vital
agricultural sector, and fears the dams will provide difficult neighbors with
the leverage to delay the release of water. In 2012 Uzbekistan’s president,
Islam Karimov, warned that moving forward with these plans without regard for
downstream states like Uzbekistan and Kazakhstan could lead to a full-blown
war.

![Lake Issyk Kul is the largest lake in Kyrgyzstan and the tenth-largest lake
in the world by volume.](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2014/06/04-FS_LR_Water-8.jpg)

Lake Issyk Kul is the largest lake in Kyrgyzstan and the tenth-largest lake in
the world by volume. Photo by Fyodor Savintsev / Salt Images, 2012. Copyright:
Creative Time Reports, used with permission.

Water problems are not limited to conflicts between the region’s states, but
extend to clashes within states and between communities living in them. They
also arise from crumbling Soviet-era infrastructure. Upstream Kyrgyzstan, for
instance, loses a third of its water wealth through holes in decaying
irrigation networks. This problem is critical in rural areas, where large
amounts of water are crucial for the growth of crops.

![A shepherd boy watches a herd of cows as he stands on a tree stump near Lake
Issyk Kul. Photo by Fyodor Savintsev / Salt Images,
2013.](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2014/06/24-FS_LR_Water-0072.jpg)

A shepherd boy watches a herd of cows as he stands on a tree stump near Lake
Issyk Kul.  
Photo by Fyodor Savintsev / Salt Images, 2013. Copyright: Creative Time
Reports, used with permission.

To keep produce from drying out, desperate Kyrgyz villagers have set up
handmade dams that divert the local rivers and make irrigation accessible.
Their actions have led to drought in downstream communities. In areas like the
Kyrgyz region of Batken, where few can objectively verify where Kyrgyzstan
ends and Tajikistan starts, violent clashes between Kyrgyz and Tajik villagers
over irrigation water have become commonplace. Both sides accuse the other of
stealing.

![A quarry filled with water from melting snow in the Nookat region of
Kyrgyzstan.](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2014/06/05-FS_LR_Water-10.jpg)

A quarry filled with water from melting snow in the Nookat region of
Kyrgyzstan. Photo by Fyodor Savintsev / Salt Images, 2012. Copyright: Creative
Time Reports, used with permission.

But Central Asia’s water scarcity is just a snapshot of a broader crisis with
grave consequences for the whole Asian continent, according to several Russian
scientists studying the ramifications of the water shortage.

![Military officers guard the entrance to the Kambaratinsk Dam on the Naryn
River. The Kambar-Ati-1 Hydro Power Plant at the base of the dam, largely
financed through a $2 billion Russian aid package, will have a capacity of
approximately 1,900 megawatts.](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2014/06/08-FS_LR_Water-13_inline.jpg)

Military officers guard the entrance to the Kambaratinsk Dam on the Naryn
River. The Kambar-Ati-1 Hydro Power Plant at the base of the dam, largely
financed through a $2 billion Russian aid package, will have a capacity of
approximately 1,900 megawatts. Photo by Fyodor Savintsev / Salt Images, 2012.
Copyright: Creative Time Reports, used with permission.

In China, a giant population and large-scale commercial activities are placing
huge pressure on the Illi and Irtysh rivers, both of which flow into
Kazakhstan, the latter connecting with the Ob in Russia. Further draining of
the Ob-Irtysh basin will cause irreparable damage to all of Asia, threatening
vast expanses of fertile lands, jeopardizing the fishing industry and severely
harming the Russian part of the Arctic Ocean.

![Since the collapse of the Soviet Union, the irrigation system in Kyrgyzstan
has fallen into decay.](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2014/06/10-FS_LR_Water-18.jpg)

Since the collapse of the Soviet Union, the irrigation system in Kyrgyzstan
has fallen into decay. Photo by Fyodor Savintsev / Salt Images, 2012.
Copyright: Creative Time Reports, used with permission.

Central Asia’s water conflicts are often perceived as local skirmishes of
little significance to the rest of the world. But as the water levels in the
region diminish with every passing year, the anguish of dry spells will drive
more and more people to enter into conflict. A point of no return for this
socio-ecological disaster is drawing nearer. Shedding light on the situation
is of pivotal importance today, while there is still time to prevent the water
shortages—and the wars that will come with them—from spreading.

