[![](https://globalvoices.org/wp-content/uploads/2017/03/protest-
university.jpg)](http://newbloommag.net/2017/03/07/university-agreements-
china-tw/)

University professor Fan Yun holds a placard saying “I am Fan Yun of National
Taiwan University, Academic Freedom is not for sale.” Photo credit: Fan Yun
via News Bloom.

_**The original post was written by Brian Hioe and originally published on New
Bloom on[March 7](http://newbloommag.net/2017/03/07/university-agreements-
china-tw/). The following edited version is republished on Global Voices in
accordance with a content partnership agreement.**_

The recent revelation that [at least
80](http://www.chinapost.com.tw/taiwan/national/national-
news/2017/03/09/493171/30-of.htm) of Taiwan’s 157 universities have signed
agreements with China promising not to discuss unification/independence issues
or the issue of “one China, one Taiwan” in class has rocked Taiwanese society
in the past week.

Among these universities are Taiwan’s leading educational institutions,
including National Tsing Hua University, National Chengchi University, and
others, as well as both public and private institutions.

Schools, however, argue that signing the agreement does not imply that they
agree to the “One China Principle”, which states that Taiwan is an inalienable
part of China.

The issue of unification/independent has been an arena of political contest in
high school education as the elementary education curriculum and textbooks
have to be approved by the Ministry of Education. The attempt made by the
former ruling Kuomingtang party to push for a revision of history [framing
Taiwan and China as a single political entity since the Ming
Dynasty](http://foreignpolicy.com/2015/07/21/taiwan-textbook-controversy-
china-independence-history/) in high school classrooms saw the Ministry of
Education occupied by protesters in [August
2015](http://newbloommag.net/2015/09/07/minedu-occupation-account/).

Nevertheless, it has generally been assumed that Taiwanese universities enjoy
freedom of speech as the teachers and professors have the freedom to design
their curriculum. The university agreements with China, hence, have taken many
by surprise.

Taiwanese university professors such as Fan Yun of the Social Democratic Party
and former Shih Hsin University president Lai Ting-ming [organized a
petition](http://www.taipeitimes.com/News/taiwan/archives/2017/03/07/2003666286)
condemning the university agreements.

University associations including the National Taiwan University Student
Association and the National Taiwan University Graduate Student Association
have issued a joint statement to condemn the secret deal.

Furthermore, [an online
campaign](http://news.ltn.com.tw/news/focus/paper/1083452) has been organized
calling on university students and professors to take photos of themselves
holding signs that state their name, affiliation, and that “Academic freedom
is not for sale”.

Yet, taking into the account of the current condition of tertiary education
industry in Taiwan, the agreement is not at all surprising.

University administrations have a tendency to maintain good relations with
China in order to attract Chinese exchange students, who constitute not
insubstantial numbers on the campuses of some universities.

Against the background of Taiwan’s declining birthrate, university
administrations have to make sure that they have enough student enrollment to
keep the schools running. As the agreement suggests, academic freedom seems to
be the cost for keeping the schools in operation by attracting Chinese
students .

For Taiwanese universities that aspire towards big profits, more mainland
Chinese students implies more revenue, since in some schools, mainland Chinese
students [have to pay close to
double](http://news.ltn.com.tw/news/focus/paper/1083452) the tuition of
Taiwanese students.

The logic behind the agreement trading off academic freedom thus similar to
the sale of Taiwan media companies to Chinese groups. Both the freedom of
press and academic freedom has a price tag on them.

At the same time, the fact that Chinese students, along with other
international students studying in Taiwan, have been [active participants in
the Sunflower Movement](http://foreignpolicy.com/2015/10/22/does-time-in-
taiwan-change-young-mainland-minds-democracy-education-influence/) and other
independence-leaning social movements, have made China anxious about its young
generation being exposed too much to new ideas and political activism.

Beijing has reason to be wary. More recently, some [Chinese students studying
in Taiwan have participated in Taiwan's LGBT
movement](https://theinitium.com/article/20161220-opinion-taiwan-mainland-
student/), and some have made critical remarks regarding Chinese state
policies. The university agreements can be viewed as a measure to keep
mainland Chinese students away from pro-independence sentiment.

In reaction to public concern over the universities secret agreements with
Beijing, the Ministry of Education stressed that it would ensure that Chinese
exchange students can continue to study in Taiwan, and that academic freedom
would be protected.

Many Taiwanese, however, have an unsettling feeling they are being sold out.

