[![](https://globalvoices.org/wp-
content/uploads/2019/07/Screenshot-2019-07-03-at-13.50.12.png)](https://www.facebook.com/CENINOW/videos/381689202552896/)

Election results were broadcast live on Facebook before Mauritanian
authorities proceeded to shut down the internet. Source: Screenshot of a
Facebook live broadcast by country's election commission.

Mauritanian authorities restored access to the internet after disrupting it
for 10 days following the disputed presidential elections of June 23. However,
the government continues to restrict press freedom and freedom of expression
as part of its post-election crackdown.

Government-backed candidate, Mohamed Ould Ghazouani, garnered 52 percent of
the vote, but widespread allegations of fraud have marred the election: Three
opposition candidates, including anti-slavery activist Biram Dah Abeid — who
[came third](https://twitter.com/weddady/status/1142644897121492992) with 18
percent of the votes — [challenged](https://www.reuters.com/article/us-
mauritania-election-court/mauritanian-court-confirms-election-win-for-
government-backed-candidate-idUSKCN1TW2XK) the results before the
Constitutional Council. Small [protests](https://www.reuters.com/article/us-
mauritania-election-court/mauritanian-court-confirms-election-win-for-
government-backed-candidate-idUSKCN1TW2XK) disputing the results also took
place in the capital, Nouakchott.

On Monday, July 1, the council [dismissed](https://www.reuters.com/article/us-
mauritania-election-court/mauritanian-court-confirms-election-win-for-
government-backed-candidate-idUSKCN1TW2XK) the opposition’s appeal, confirming
Ould Ghazouani as the country’s next president on the basis of insufficient
evidence for the opposition’s allegations of fraud.

### Arrests targeting journalists and opposition figures

Ahmedou Ould al-Wadea, a presenter for Mauritanian TV channel Al Mourabitoun,
was [arrested](https://cpj.org/2019/07/two-journalists-arrested-internet-cut-
amid-dispute.php) from his home in the capital Nouakchott on July 3. Al-Wadea,
who is known for his criticism of outgoing president Mohamed Ould Abdel Aziz,
remains in detention in an undisclosed location according to [human rights
groups](https://www.facebook.com/7oriyatmr/photos/a.2092922934332567/2155472384744288/?type=3&theater).
It remains unclear which [charges](https://cpj.org/2019/07/two-journalists-
arrested-internet-cut-amid-dispute.php) he faces.

Al-Wadea was not the only journalist to be targeted in this post-election
crackdown. On June 26, police arrested Seydi Moussa Camaras, another
journalist known for his criticism of the government. Cameras is the director
of publishing for the weekly independent newspaper[ La Nouvelle
Expression](http://nouvelleexpression.org/editorial.php). He spent a week in
detention before he was released on July 3. According to Reporters Without
Borders, state security agencies [accused](https://rsf.org/en/news/mauritania-
still-violating-press-freedom-after-restoring-internet) him of disputing the
election results during phone calls:

> RSF has learned that the state security agents who arrested Moussa at his
> home, seizing all of the mobile phones and laptops there, accused him of
> disputing the election results during phone conversations, suggesting that
> his calls had been tapped.

Several opposition figures were also arrested by the authorities, Amnesty said
in a June 27
[statement](https://www.amnesty.org/en/latest/news/2019/06/mauritania-
authorities-must-exercise-restraint-in-policing-protests-and-lift-the-
internet-shutdown/). These include Samba Thiam, the leader of the Forces
progressistes pour le changement (Progressist forces for change), before he
was [released](https://mondafrique.com/mauritanie-lafro-mauritanien-samba-
thiam-simpose-face-au-pouvoir/) in early July.

### Ten-day internet shutdown lifted

Amid the crackdown, the government also resorted to shutting down the
internet, before lifting lifting the ban on July 3.

The Ministry of the Interior reportedly ordered the shutdown for security
reasons, although activists and human rights groups believe the real aim was
to [prevent](http://www.mfwa.org/country-highlights/mfwa-condemns-social-
media-disruption-violence-against-protesters/) the opposition from mobilizing
protesters.

The government first disrupted access to mobile internet around mid-day local
time on June 23, [according](http://www.mfwa.org/country-highlights/mfwa-
condemns-social-media-disruption-violence-against-protesters/) to the Media
Foundation for West Africa. Forty-eight hours later, they also [disrupted
](https://netblocks.org/reports/post-election-internet-shutdown-in-mauritania-
following-widespread-mobile-disruptions-JA6zmeAQ)access to fixed line
connections.

The disruptions affected all three of Mauritania’s internet service providers:
[Mauritel](https://www.facebook.com/mauritel.mr/),
[Chinguitel](https://www.facebook.com/chinguitel.mr/) and
[Mattel](https://www.facebook.com/mattel.mr/). The companies [did not provide
a reason](http://www.mfwa.org/country-highlights/mfwa-condemns-social-media-
disruption-violence-against-protesters/) for the disruptions nor did they
[notify](https://www.facebook.com/ZeidSaleck/posts/1252890794879225) their
users before they took place.

The disruptions disrupted the capabilities of opposition leaders from
organizing and mobilising protesters, in a country where only 21 percent of
its 4 million people have an internet
[connection.](https://qz.com/africa/1655017/mauritania-shuts-down-internet-
after-disputed-elections/)

It isolated Mauritanians from the rest of the world — particularly human
rights defenders, opposition leaders, and journalists — greatly
[limiting](https://ar.smex.org/قطع-الإنترنت-الجوال-في-موريتانيا-بالت/) their
ability to access information and publish information about the government's
crackdown on protesters, journalists and the political opposition.

