![](https://globalvoices.org/wp-
content/uploads/2017/10/Kumurdo_Cathedral-800x600.jpg)

Kumurdo Cathedral, a tenth-century Georgian church in a majority Armenian
village that was the site of clashes over the church's heritage. (photo:
[Wikimedia
Commons](https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/2/25/Kumurdo_Cathedral.jpg),
Jaba1977)

**_The following is a[partner post ](http://www.eurasianet.org/node/85401)from
[EurasiaNet.org](http://www.eurasianet.org/) written by [Joshua
Kucera](http://www.eurasianet.org/taxonomy/term/1725). Republished with
permission._**

A [clash](http://jnews.ge/?p=15914) over a contested church in a majority-
Armenian part of Georgia has raised tensions and, many fear, set the stage for
further ethnic conflict.

The [clash took place](https://civil.ge/eng/article.php?id=30481) in Kumurdo,
a nearly entirely ethnic Armenian village in the region of Samtskhe-Javakheti
bordering Armenia. The village is the site of at a tenth-century Georgian
church, the Kumordo Cathedral, which has been undergoing reconstruction work
by the Georgian Ministry of Culture.

In the course of that work some graves were found. For the last two centuries
or so the church has functioned as an Armenian church, and on September 30 a
group of locals brought a khachkar — a traditional Armenian stone memorial
marker — to the church to lay at the site where they believed their ancestors
were buried.

They were not allowed into the church by police, and the situation escalated,
with locals throwing rocks at the police, who called in reinforcements of
special riot units. Four police officers were reported to be injured, and two
locals were arrested. The situation was ultimately defused when Interior
Minister Giorgi Mgebrishvili went to the village and met with local
representatives.

In a region full of ethnic conflicts, the ethnic Armenians of Georgia (about
five percent of the country's population according to the most recent census)
have been relatively quiescent. But this incident raised fears that that may
change.

The “clashes evoked gruesome memories of ethnic violence of the early 90s,”
[wrote](http://dfwatch.net/ethnic-armenians-clash-with-police-in-south-of-
georgia-49188) news website Democracy & Freedom Watch.

Inevitably, there were various charges that the clash was a “provocation.”
Many noted that the episode took place just ahead of municipal elections
across Georgia. An MP of the ruling Georgian Dream party, and member of the
Armenia-Georgia Friendship Group David Chichinadze [told Public Radio of
Armenia ](http://www.armradio.am/en/2017/10/02/armenians-clash-with-georgian-
police-after-attempts-to-erect-cross-stone-in-churchyard/)that it was a
“provocation before elections.”

“There were people giving out money to villagers. This is certainly an issue
to be solved by the church and clergymen, but there are certain people willing
to politicize the issue,” Chichinadze said, without specifying who the
provocateurs might be.

“Even the Armenians of Javakheti think that the Kumurdo people are
‘problematic,'” [said ](http://vestnikkavkaza.net/interviews/Church-of-
Georgian-Armenian-discord.html)Georgian analyst Mamuka Areshidze. “Their
reputation is not the best one. Kumurdo is a very criminogenic village. I do
not exclude that the excessive ‘passionarity’ of the Kumurdo people is used by
someone to worsen the situation and ignite the confrontation, using claims
about the church.”

Some, however, suggested that it was a provocation on the part of the Georgian
police. “According to my sources, on the day of the incident the residents of
Kumordo didn't intend to install the khachkar, but only to put it in a safe
place in the churchyard” with the intention of installing it at the end of
October, said Johnny Melikian, an Armenian expert on relations with Georgia.
Melikian said the police overreacted. “In my opinion, a provocation took
place. Clashes began, in the course of which the police used more force than
was necessary, and then the riot police got involved,” he said.

Whether or not it was a provocation, it is a worrying development. “This event
is like a seed falling into an already well fertilized soil of xenophobia and
especially Armenophobia, propogated by certain, especially pro-Russian,
elements in Georgia,”
[wrote](https://www.facebook.com/dimitri.avaliani.5/posts/10155699075797673)
Dmitry Avaliani, a Georgian journalist, on his Facebook page.

“A conflict is ready: from the Georgian perspective Armenians are seizing a
Georgian church; from the Armenian side — the opposite. All 25 years of
independence, despite some small incidents, we've managed to avoid major
conflict in Samtskhe-Javakheti,” Avaliani continued. “Now there is every
possibility of escalating the situation — xenophobia that has been simmering
for years, weakness of state institutions, the lack of a clear policy for
regional development and ethnic minorities, and a great interest on the part
of our northern neighbor, which enjoys complete freedom to carry out its
subversive activities inside Georgia.”

Avaliani concluded his post with a crucial point: “The only positive thing:
spoiling relations with Georgia is not in Yerevan's interest.” In spite of
occasional tensions, and being involved in opposing geopolitical blocs (a
Eurasian Union and Collective Security Treaty Organization member in Armenia's
case, and a NATO and European Union aspirant in Georgia's), the two neighbors
both need good relations with one another. And so this is unlikely to spread
much further, no matter who might be provoking it.

