[![In his struggle to access a university education, Christian Quiñónez was in
two serious accidents on his way out of the Paraguayan Chaco. Photograph by
Nicolás Sáenz, taken with permission from the website
Kurtural.](https://es.globalvoices.org/wp-
content/uploads/2017/02/CQ.jpg)](https://kurtural.com/escuelasquecaen/)

In his struggle to access a university education, Christian Quiñónez was in
two serious accidents on his way out of the Paraguayan Chaco. Photograph by
Nicolás Sáenz, taken with permission from the website Kurtural.

_The series[Cows That Fly, Schools That
Crumble](https://globalvoices.org/2016/10/18/paraguay-a-country-where-cows-
fly-while-schools-crumble/),
[published](https://kurtural.com/escuelasquecaen/) by Paraguayan economic and
cultural news site [Kurtural](https://kurtural.com/), explores the ways in
which Paraguay's education system fails students. The latest installment,
written __by Patricia Benítez, is republished on Global Voices in two
parts.[The first ](https://globalvoices.org/2017/03/07/going-to-university-in-
paraguay-can-be-a-life-or-death-decision/)details the circumstances around
public and private education in Paraguay and the historic events in Puerto
Casado. The second continues below._

Five years ago, Christian Quiñónez, who risked his life on more than one
occasion in order to attend university, survived a car accident on his way to
the capital. At the time, he was pursuing a business administration degree at
the Autonomous University of Asunción. It was a distance-learning program, but
it required him to take exams in person. For this reason, every two months,
Christian had to travel the more than 600 kilometers to Asunción. On one of
these trips, the truck he was travelling in flipped over and fell into a
roadside ditch.

According to the police report, the accident was caused by the extremely poor
state of the road. Christian escaped unharmed, but Marisela Ramírez and the
driver, Freddy Fernández — the son of Justo Fernández, the then governor of
the Alto Paraguay department — were both killed. Two other passengers survived
but were seriously injured: Fernando Fernández, the governor's other son, and
Gleisy Ruiz. All of them were university students.

[![The launch of a boat to Vallemí with favorable weather conditions. It is no
always so pleasant. Photograph by Nicolás Sáenz, taken from the website
Kurtural, used with permission.](https://es.globalvoices.org/wp-
content/uploads/2017/02/Bote2.jpg)](https://kurtural.com/escuelasquecaen/)

The launch of a boat to Vallemí with favorable weather conditions. It is not
always so pleasant. Photograph by Nicolás Sáenz, taken from the website
Kurtural, used with permission.

### Surviving to study

The company Carlos Casado SA began to decline in the 1980s when tannin stopped
being profitable, but it didn't completely shut down until between 1996 and
2000. Christian doesn't remember any of this; at the time he was only a boy,
barely older than his son Jonás.

After almost a century of exploitation of _quebracho_ forests and the
incursion of cattle farming, the firm left the country. Before doing so, they
sold nearly 500,000 hectares of land and everything on them — ex-factory
structures and facilities, animals and people — to the Sun Myung Moon company,
a self-proclaimed South Korean messiah. Moon has already passed away, but in
2000 when the sale was made final, he headed up the [Unification
Church](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Unification_Church), known also as the
Moon sect. Thus, the land, the city, its inhabitants and the indigenous
community passed into the hands of a new owner.

In 2005, a large part of the population of Puerto Casado marched 250
kilometers to Asunción to claim rights to their lands. In 2012, the National
Institute of Rural and Land Development declared Casado a “colony by law,”
after an attempt to expropriate the land was reversed through a complex
judicial process. Through this decision, the population could no longer be
evicted from some 35,000 hectares, including the urban center. However, the
fight to legitimize their right to live there is not over.

During the [Chaco War](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Chaco_War) (1932-1935),
when Paraguay and Bolivia were at war, Puerto Casado was the loading and
unloading zone for the Paraguayan combatants who also used the area's factory
and train workshops. More than 80 years later, Christian and Éver Pereira
leave from this same place to study. Only Luis Pereira stopped going to
classes. Éver said:

> Él siempre quiso ser militar. Yo le insistí nomás para que estudie algo.
> Pero luego de lo que sucedió desistió totalmente.

> He always wanted to be a soldier. I pushed for him to just study anything.
> But after what happened, he quit all together.

However, both Éver and Christian aren't going to give up this fight. Not now.
Not in the middle of their journey, they say, not even after getting to know
the fury of the river. Migrating to Vallemí, perhaps to Concepción or another
area to avoid the risk of the daily boat trip is not an alternative that
either one of them will consider. They are stopped by their jobs, their
families, their connection and commitment to a community that has other
shortcomings, like its lack of hospitals and navegable roads. Christian said:

> Si me voy a estudiar a otro lado, fácilmente me voy a acostumbrar al
> ambiente y ya no voy a querer volver a Casado. Y si no hay profesionales
> dentro de la comunidad nunca va a haber una universidad.

> If I leave and study somewhere else, I'll easily get used to that
> environment and I won't want to come back to Casado. And if there aren't
> professionals in the community, there will never be a university.

He not only thinks of his own future, but also the future of his children
James and Jonás. “The authorities in the capital need to start looking over
here. From those big buildings they definitely can't see that the Chaco
doesn't have anything. Those buildings are blocking their view. They need to
go a little farther up and look towards our region,” he said.

He is referring to to the shiny buildings that make up the landscape of the
“new economic center in Asunción” as it is called in the capital, where
skyscrapers grow at the pace of the real estate boom. This is a parallel
universe for Christian, one in which “you get on a bus with air conditioning
and you travel peacefully, you even have time to think why someone else is
driving,” he said with a smile that stands in contrast to the tough life in
the Paraguayan Chaco. Where he lives, the year is divided into a rainy season
and a season of drought. When the earth isn't dry and cracked, it's the
isolation caused by the lack of roads that drowns you.

Seven years ago, travelling from Asunción to Puerto Casado on rainy days took
36 hours, maybe 48. You had to go by bus until the port in Concepción, little
more than 400 kilometers from the capital. Later, you had to take the
Aquidabán, a boat that left port once a week for Vallemí. The new route that
connects Concepción with Vallemí allows people to take a daily bus from the
capital and arrive to their destination in nine hours, or vise versa.
Christian, for example, makes the trip every time Jonás and James need to go
to the pediatrician. Thus he reflected:

> Envidio las oportunidades que se tienen al otro lado del río. Para nosotros,
> ese es otro mundo.

> I envy the opportunities they have on the the other side of the river. For
> us, this is another world.

