[![The Kitchenware-Revolution in Iceland was organize by Hördur Torfason and
"Raddir Fólksins". It started in the wake of the collapse of the banking
system followed by the decimation of Icelandic economy in the beginning of
October 2008. It resulted in the resignation of Geir H. Haarde and his cabinet
on January 26. 2009. The protest meetings were held every Saturday at the
Austurvöllur square in front of Alþingishús - the Icelandic parliament house.
The first meeting \(week 1\) was dated Saturday 11. October 2008. The 16th
meeting dated January 24. 2009 By OddurBen \(Own work\) \[CC BY-SA 3.0
\(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/3.0\) or GFDL
\(http://www.gnu.org/copyleft/fdl.html\)\], via Wikimedia
Commons](https://globalvoices.org/wp-
content/uploads/2016/10/1024px-W16_Protesters_2826-800x536.jpg)](https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:W16_Protesters_2826.JPG)

Icelanders protest in January 2009 during the country's “Pots and Pans
Revolution”. PHOTO: OddurBen (Own work) (CC BY-SA 3.0) via Wikimedia Commons.

 **By _[Lawrence Lessig](http://www.lessig.org/about/)_**

I’m in Iceland for the term—on sabbatical, with my family, giving my kids a
sense of ~America, writing tons of law-geek stuff—and watching an amazing
political battle brew in the upcoming parliamentary elections (October 29).
Turns out, democracy has problems everywhere—except that here, an
extraordinary citizens movement is doing something about it.

Some background: You’ll remember the financial crisis of 2008. That crisis hit
Iceland hard. So hard that tens of thousands marched on the Parliament banging
pots and pans (aka “[The Pots & Pans
Revolution](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/2009_Icelandic_financial_crisis_protests)”),
and demanding change.

Some linked that crisis to a failure of Iceland’s constitution. And they
responded to that failure by launching a process to crowdsource a new one. At
first, the process was not connected to the government. But then the
Parliament embraced the movement, and gave it form. A thousand people
(randomly selected) would identify the values of the new constitution. Then a
constitutional council would be elected to draft a constitution based on those
values.

More than 500 ran. Twenty-five were elected. And for four months, they worked
to draft a new constitution—in public, posting their version on Facebook, and
taking comments from around the world. The Parliament then put the draft up
for a vote (non-binding, asking whether there should be a new constitution
“based on” the Council’s draft). Four years ago, more than two-thirds of those
voting approved the draft. ([Blueberry
Soup](https://vimeo.com/ondemand/blueberrysoup) is a wonderful documentary
about the process.)

And then, amazingly, Parliament did nothing. The bill to adopt a constitution
“based on” the draft stalled. Everyone (in Parliament at least) seemed to
forget it.

But when the [Panama Papers
scandal](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Panama_Papers) broke, and the [Prime
Minister resigned](http://www.nytimes.com/2016/04/06/world/europe/panama-
papers-iceland.html?_r=0), the people of Iceland were reminded that there was
still a government to fix. And so an amazing citizens movement in Iceland
started to develop, to press the issue to the center of these elections.

I’ve been able to watch this movement unfold. And as a “fix democracy first”
sort of democrat, I’ve been watching with great admiration (and a bit of
jealousy). The leaders of this movement are all non-politicians. There are
politician heroes, too, like [Birgitta
Jónsdóttir](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Birgitta_J%C3%B3nsd%C3%B3ttir) of
the Pirate Party, and [Katrin
Jakobsdóttir](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Katr%C3%ADn_Jakobsd%C3%B3ttir) of
the Left Greens, but the real activists here are not people running for
anything. They are just citizens trying to get a government that knows for
whom it works — because after four years of ignoring a referendum, that’s
apparently an open question.

A few days ago they launched [a social media
campaign](https://canyouhearus.is/) to frame this election around this issue.
The message of the campaign is a clever remake of a familiar meme: “Can you
[as in the Parliament] hear us [as in the people] now?” Four videos (two in
English, two in Icelandic) set the terms of the debate, plus the first 2 of 10
(in Icelandic) discuss the top 10 problems the new constitution will solve.
The English versions are below.

The campaign asks voters — “whether on the right or left”—to vote only for
parties that commit “to making the ratification of a new constitution based on
the draft of the constitutional council a priority in the next parliament.” So
far, the four key opposition parties have made that commitment — the [Pirate
Party](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pirate_Party_%28Iceland%29), [Left-
Green](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Left-Green_Movement), [Social
Democrats](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Social_Democratic_Party_%28Iceland%29),
and the [Bright Future
](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bright_Future_%28Iceland%29)party. There’s a
great chance those four will constitute a majority in the new Parliament.

If this movement takes off, it has a powerful potential—in Iceland and
internationally. The [Icelandic Constitution
Society](http://stjornarskrarfelagid.is/) (which is running the campaign) has
promised to spend the money they raise on rallying Iceland to this cause. But
anything raised beyond what’s necessary will go to democracy work
internationally.

Imagine the frame of this campaign — [Can You Hear
Us](http://canyouhearus.is/)—applied to democracies globally? (I’ve already
reserved CanYouHearUs.US). My favorite line from the longer of their ads:
“While we are local, democracy is global. Let’s show them what that means.”

This could be a rare victory for democracy reform this election cycle—and one
that could inspire many elsewhere.

It’s already gotten me.

**_[Lawrence Lessig](http://www.lessig.org/about/) is an American academic,
attorney, and political activist. A [version of this article
](https://medium.com/@lessig/a-letter-from-iceland-canyouhearus-
is-789910d293c0#.ydpoy2o90)was previously published on Medium. This edited
version is published under an [Attribution 4.0 International (CC BY
4.0)](https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/) license._ **

