There are some Taiwanese playing in Major League Baseball: [Chin-Feng
Chen](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Chin-Feng_Chen) in Dodgers from 2002-2005,
[Chin-Lung Hu](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Chin-Lung_Hu) in Dodgers, [Hong-
Chih Kuo](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hong-Chih_Kuo) in Dodgers, [Chin-Hui
Tsao](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Chin-hui_Tsao) in Royals, and [Chien-Ming
Wang](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Chien-Ming_Wang) in Yankees. Although they
are loved by Taiwanese, these baseball stars are not the focus of this
article. Here are stories about how baseballs change the life of challenged
people and students in remote elementary schools.

![baseball](https://www.globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2008/04/1631731604.jpg)  
_Photo courtesy
of[Haomei](http://www.wretch.cc/blog/haomei&article_id=3245083)._

The first story starts when a screen writer, an actor, and a director, [Nien-
Jen Wu](http://www.imdb.com/name/nm0943150/) left a message in [Haomei's
blog](http://www.wretch.cc/blog/haomei) about the Sacred Heart Home for the
challenged people. [Fr. Franz
Burkhardt](http://www.amdgchinese.org/en/sections.php?cat_id=1&s_id=1&ss_id=9)
founded the Sacred Heart Home in Chia-Yi, Taiwan, in 1980, and he planned to
build a larger building to help more challenged people. Although the Reverend
Franz Burkhardt, a recipient of presidential and papal honors for his services
to Taiwan over almost half a century, died in 2002, his colleagues keep
working on this project. Due to the funding shortage, Haomei started to
[blog](http://www.wretch.cc/blog/haomei&category_id=1749721) about the Sacred
Heart Home and helps raise money and invite people to visit the Sacred Heart
Home.

An episode for these fund-raising activities is about baseballs.

[Chensumi](http://blog.roodo.com/chensumi/archives/1581922.html) talked about
how [Tai-Yuan Kuo](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Taigen_kaku) signed baseballs
for a fund-raising auction:

>
> 我跟郭泰源總教練提到聖心募款的事情，他聽得很仔細，也很豪爽答應簽名[…]我在一旁小心打探，「多簽一些可以嗎？」[…]郭總說，「可以啊，愛心的事情，當然沒問題！」

I mentioned fund-raising for Sacred Heart Home to Tai-Yuan Kuo. He listened
carefully and agreed to sign some baseballs without hesitance.[…] I asked him,
“can you sign more?” He answered, “sure. For doing good things, there is never
a no!.”

This auction raised 182100 NTD for the Sacred Heart Home, and this success
inspired some baseball lovers to contribute their baseball-related souvenirs
to the second auction. The second auction raised 281861 NTD for the Sacred
Heart Home. The result is not only satisfactory for the Sacred Heart Home but
also for the baseball players and
[lovers](http://blog.roodo.com/chensumi/archives/1656505.html)–

> 以前只要提到金錢和棒球掛勾，大家都會想到簽賭，沒想到這次金錢跟棒球掛勾，居然成就這麼動人的好事。

In the past, when we talked about how the baseball is related to money, we
thought about gambling. However, this time when these baseballs work with
money, we have accomplished something so touching.

The second story is about helping some baseball teams in the remote elementary
schools. [Chensumi](http://blog.roodo.com/chensumi/archives/4651273.html)
reported:

>
> 堅果團購夢想計畫已經募到新台幣72000元。[…]我們也將委請藍文成教練幫忙遴選最需要幫助的球隊，在賽後這段期間，儘快將球具送達學校，給那些有夢想的棒球孩子，充滿溫暖的禮物。同時感謝球魂網站好友林言熹與楊榮健的協助，取得球具配備最划算合理的估價單。[…]預估我們所募得的金額，將有機會補助三支以上的偏遠部落少棒隊。

Chien-Kuo Group's project has raised 72000 NTD.[…] We will ask couch Wen-Cheng
Lan to help us choose some baseball teams that need our attention most. After
this baseball game, we will send the equipments as a pleasant present to the
elementary schools for the young players who pursue their baseball dream. We
also thank our friends Yen-Hsi Lin and Jung-Chien Yang's help so we can get
the most reasonable assessment for these equipments. The fund we raised should
be able to help more than three baseball teams in the remote elementary
schools.

Chien-Kuo Group's plan is based on [the
love](http://blog.roodo.com/redyellow/archives/4990887.html) for the children
and baseball:

> 我們也許讓未來有機會站上大聯盟投手丘與打擊區的小孩們，未來要扛下國家隊第四棒或職棒中心打線的小選手們，可以有新手套，可以不必擔心練習用球不見，同時
> 讓他們知道，這段辛苦的棒球路，不是那麼寂寞，因為我們相信，在棒球起步的階段，曾經受過幫助的人，會一輩子都懂得感恩，不會愧對棒球之神賦予他們的使命。」

We can help these children, who may stand on the MLB field or play in the
national or professional baseball teams in the future, have new mitts and not
worry about losing the practice baseballs. At the same time, they know they
are not alone. We believe that if they receive help in the beginning of their
career, they will be grateful for the potential they have when they play
baseball.

[Redyellow](http://blog.roodo.com/redyellow/archives/4990887.html) described
what they saw when sending the equipments to one of the elementary schools:

> 這一天我回來後，心底帶著暖暖的滿足。意外變成先發登板的我，帶著大家的愛心來到汐止國小，看著天真活潑的小球員，心裏彷彿被純淨的水流洗淨一般。到底是我
> 幫助了他們，還是他們幫助了我，讓我找回心中久違的感動。[…]替這些勇敢追夢的孩子們吶 喊加油吧！因為這也是為我們自己加油啊！  
>  終於我覺得自己是個棒球迷了。但是今天不當球迷。

Today I came home with warm satisfaction in my mind. I became the first one
sending our love to Hsi-Chih elementary school by accident. When I saw these
lovely lively young players, my heart seems to be washed by clean water. It
may look like I help them. However, they help me to find the touching feeling
I have lost for a long time. […]Let's cheer for these brave children when they
pursue their dream! By doing it we also cheer for ourselves! Finally I feel I
am a baseball fan, but I am not a baseball fan today.

