Just last week, HubSpot, a Boston-based Internet marketing firm, [released a
report](http://blog.hubspot.com/blog/tabid/6307/bid/4439/State-of-the-
Twittersphere-Q4-2008-Report.aspx) which stated that micro-blogging platform
[Twitter](http://twitter.com) gains 5,000 to 10,000 new users every day. Given
the recent use of Twitter in discussing major events such as the recent
attacks in [Mumbai](http://www.theage.com.au/news/technology/web/mumbai-
attacks-live-on-twitter-flickr/2008/11/27/1227491713487.html) and
[Gaza](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2008/12/28/the-global-twittersphere-
discusses-gaza/), it is unsurprising to see such growth.

Governments have also been using Twitter for quite some time. The [U.S.
government operates a number of Twitter
accounts](http://www.washingtonpost.com/wp-
dyn/content/article/2008/12/23/AR2008122301999_pf.html) (including
[@USAGov](http://twitter.com/USAgov),
[@TheWhiteHouse](http://twitter.com/TheWhiteHouse), and
[@NASA](http://twitter.com/nasa)), with other countries’ governments sure to
follow. This afternoon, in the midst of the Israel-Gaza conflict, the Israeli
Consulate of New York set up a Twitter account. [Its first tweet
read](http://twitter.com/israelconsulate/status/1084312673):

[![](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2008/12/israelconsulate-
welcome.png)](http://twitter.com/israelconsulate/status/1084312673)

Shortly afterward, the consulate announced its intent to hold a citizens
“press” conference on Tuesday, December 30, from 1-3 pm EST:

![](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2008/12/israelconsulate.png)

The conference presents a unique, never-before-seen opportunity for a
government to create an open platform for global discussion during a time of
crisis. Twitter users are able to send questions during the conference, and
follow the discussion by using the
[#AskIsrael](http://search.twitter.com/search?q=%23askisrael) hashtag. The
face behind the consulate's Twitter account is [David
Saranga](http://twitter.com/DavidSaranga), Consul for Media and Public Affairs
for Israel in the United States.

Twitter users have already begun to ask questions.
[gyokusai](http://twitter.com/gyokusai/statuses/1085299615), based in Germany,
asks:

[![](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-content/uploads/2008/12/gyokusai-
question.png)](http://twitter.com/gyokusai/statuses/1085299615)

[travmavg queries](http://twitter.com/travmavg/statuses/1085272421):

![](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-content/uploads/2008/12/travmavg.png)

Details about the press conference can be found on the consulate's
[blog](http://www.israelpolitik.org/2008/12/29/citizens-press-conference-on-
twitter/).

