Last week (Oct 23) it was announced that the European Parliaments’ Sakharov
Prize for Freedom of Thought has been awarded to Chinese political activist Hu
Jia. On the other hand, China government expressed its anger and
disappointment at the European Union decision, insisting Hu was a criminal,
and described the EU move as “gross interference in China's domestic affairs”.

In the Chinese internet, because of political censorship, there isn't much
open discussion, but [Wang haoxuan's attack on Hu
Jia](http://www.bullog.cn/blogs/wanghaoxuan/archives/196267.aspx) caught some
attention:

> 他三十多岁了，没有工作，没有正当经济来源。还要问年迈的父母要钱。是个不折不扣的啃老族。荒唐的是，胡佳连自己都养不活，却以“环保”和“
> 帮助艾滋病人”为幌子义无反顾地投身火热的“民运”事业。至于活动资金，就要靠国外那些个“民主基金会”支援了。胡佳老婆还和达赖见面，支持藏独，反对北京奥运。可见胡佳被抓一点也不冤，是罪有应得。胡佳已经肝硬化了，估计活不了多久。也许马上就要和当年的魏某一样，以保外就医的名义做为政治筹码被塞进去美国的飞机。至于他到美国以后，当然要知恩图报，为分裂中国而奋斗终身了。

He is more than thirty and unemployed. He doesn't have any proper income and
need support from parent. The most ridiculous thing is, he couldn't support
himself but claim to be a devoted activist on “environmental protection” and
“AIDS”. And his activities were supported by foreign “democratic foundations”.
His wife met with Dalai Lama, supported Tibet independent and against Beijing
Olympics. We can see that Hu Jia is not innocent at all in his crime. Now he
suffers from liver diseases, probably will be trafficked out of the country to
the U.S. Once he arrives there, he had to pay back by devoting to the
separation of China.

> 胡佳，你已经沦为了一个受西方列强利用的分裂分子。中国不欢迎你，快滚吧。

Hu Jia, you have become a separatist used by western countries. China will not
welcome you. Go away!

Duimanpark, a Hong Kong blogger, laughs at such kind of name calling attack[
with a sarcastic
tone](http://diumanpark.mysinablog.com/index.php?op=ViewArticle&articleId=1404706):

> 這個世界的罪犯有很多種，例如製造三聚氰胺奶粉的，是罪犯；只是關注一下環保，說幾句意見，也可以是罪犯，分別只是，前者不會坐牢，後者不坐牢，也要軟禁。

There are many different types of criminal in this world. For example those
who produced the melamine milk powder, they are also criminals. For Hu, he
just concerns about environmental problem and expresses his opinions, he then
becomes a criminal. The difference is, in China, for the former type of
criminals, they stay out of jail, while for Hu and his kinds, they have to
stay in jail or under house arrest.

>
> 我認為胡佳最大的罪，是蠢。他去年向法新社說：「中國整個歷史都是獨裁統治，現在我相信，我們有機會為國家五千年來首次帶來民主，所以我覺得活在當下是福份，所以我這樣做。」他竟然蠢得相信中國會有民主，實在不能饒恕。須知道，不自私不愛財不懂走位都是中國人的原罪，一眾不為錢財打滾、反為人權奔波的人士，都是愚蠢的原罪犯啊！

My personal opinion is, the greatest sin that Hu has is being silly. Last
year, he spoke to APF that “Chinese history is all about authoritarianism, for
the first time in the 5000 years history, I now believe that we have an
opportunity for the country to bring democracy. Therefore I feel lucky to live
at this historical era, and I devote myself to the era.” He is silly enough to
believe that China will have democracy, such belief is unforgivable. In the
Chinese world, if you are not selfish, greedy and opportunistic, you have an
original sin. All those human rights activists who are not fighting for money,
they become a bunch of original criminals!

Devilfighter [praises the European Parliament
](http://devilfighter.blog.sohu.com/102787541.html)for this courageous move:

> 實 在 要 為 歐 洲 議 會 的 堅 持 與 勇 氣 鼓 掌 。
>
> 正 當 世 界 大 部 份 國 家 越 來 越 被 中 國 的 經 濟 實 力 嚇 倒 ， 越 來 越 被 中 國 的 迅 速 崛 起 迷 惑， 越 來
> 越 不 敢 開 罪 中 國 政 府 時 ， 歐 洲 議 會 仍 敢 於 堅 持 原 則 ， 仍 敢 於 開 罪 中 國 ， 毅 然決 定 把 沙 哈 洛
> 夫 人 權 獎 這 個 國 際 性 的 人 權 獎 項 頒 予 仍 囚 於 中 國 冤 獄 的 維 權 人 士 胡 佳先 生 。 像 這 樣 的 表 現
> 怎 不 讓 人 讚 賞 呢 ？

We need to clap for the European Parliament for its insistence for Human right
value and courage.

