The success of [Twitter](http://www.twitter.com) has had an enormous influence
on many new sites, that want to copy the formula: **short messages, from all
kinds of devices, for a restricted audience**. One of the sites that follows
this example is [**Reporting On**](http://reportingon.com), a **kind of
Twitter for journalists** , that has been in working in beta phase since last
year. And if you register, you'll find the site is getting quite successful
particularly among Latin American journalists.

The structure is very similar to Twitter's; we can write up to 140 characters,
which most users take advantage of to write news in the form of headlines.
Each piece of news can be tagged with many words. In the left column, we can
find the most popular tags. We can comment in each others posts as well as
reply to them, but we can't follow certain users or filter contents, except
for the tags.

Pablo Mancini [interviewed Ryan Sholin](http://www.amphibia.com.ar/hablamos-
con-ryan-sholin-de-reportingon/), who's behind the project, and he points out
that Reporting On “is a non profit project financed by [Knight News
Challenge](http://www.newschallenge.org/) in order to improve local news,
connecting people who don't talk with each other enough”. And he adds: “once
the site is working with a healthy amount of applications, I will make the
code open source and invite developers and journalists to improve it so they
can launch their own versions of the site”.

Also talk about Reporting On: [Bloc de
Periodista](http://blocdeperiodista.com/2008/10/twitter-para-periodistas.html)
(en español); [The Exploding
Newsroom](http://www.theexplodingnewsroom.com/2008/10/02/a-great-new-tool-for-
reporters-reportingon/); [Random
Mumblings](http://www.jacklail.com/blog/archives/2008/10/new-journalist-
resources-in-pu.html); and
[Linchpen](http://www.greglinch.com/2008/01/reporting-on-reportingon-
concept.html). At
[DigiDave](http://www.digidave.org/adventures_in_freelancing/2008/05/interview
---r-1.html) you can find another interview to Sholin.

