One of the major conflicts between Hong Kong and China stems from [birth
tourism](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Birth_tourism). According to official
statistics, 95,337 babies were born in Hong Kong in 2011 and as much as 40% of
babies’ parents are birth tourists from Mainland China.

According to the [Hong Kong Basic
Law](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hong_Kong_Basic_Law), the mini-constitution
in Hong Kong, children born to parents of Chinese origin can enjoy right of
abode and full citizenship even though neither of the parents is a local
resident. As a result, a large number of mainland Chinese pregnant women
travel to Hong Kong to give birth so as to escape from the [one-child
policy](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/One-child_policy) and pave the future for
their offspring.

[![The profile picture of Facebook group “Say No to Mainland pregnant women
giving birth in Hong Kong!”](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2012/03/time-to-say-
no-262x300.jpg)](http://www.facebook.com/itstimetosayno?sk=info)

The profile picture of Facebook group “Say No to Mainland pregnant women
giving birth in Hong Kong!”

Since 2009, the shortage of maternity wards in private hospitals alerted local
mothers. Public discontent exploded when a local newspaper reported at the end
of 2011 that maternity places in these hospitals are fully booked until
October 2012. Against this background, the Facebook Group [ “Say No to
Mainland pregnant women giving birth in Hong
Kong!”](http://www.facebook.com/itstimetosayno?sk=info) [founded in July 2011]
has recruited more than 112,000 followers within 6 months.

The discontented local mothers also blame the influx of mainland pregnant
women for the decline in the quality of maternity services in Hong Kong. Below
is the experience of a new mother in the maternity ward shared in Facebook
[Link to the widely shared note is not provided as the user profile is not
public]:

>
> 1月中我係瑪麗開刀，在產前房看見有位普通話婦穿水入院，醫生問她國內做產檢等問題，她答了很多次不知道。我開刀那天，看到醫生的schedule，只是一個上午，她已有5個手術，怪不得公立好多資深醫生都離職。
>
>
> 產後房有很非本地孕婦，那三日兩夜的住院，我間大房有兩個普通話人對醫護呼呼喝喝，其中一個話有小孩在深圳要她照顧，想兒科醫生盡快簽出院紙，但醫護回覆兒科ICU好爆，醫生正忙。但佢繼續嘈，我忍唔住鬧佢不要再煩姑娘，之後姑娘幫我洗傷口時訴苦，說她們日日受雙非氣，天天講普通話如在大陸工作……又話我好彩早了一天開刀，因第二日又有高危雙非衝急症，要緊急做手術，令全部預約了手術的媽媽要改時間改期！

In mid-January I gave birth in Queen Mary Hospital. In the waiting room I saw
a mother, speaking Mandarin with her waters broken. The doctor asked her about
her pre-natal check, she repeatedly answered ‘I don’t know’. On the day of
operation, I saw the doctor’s schedule. Five in a single morning. No wonder
many senior doctors in public hospitals have resigned.In the post-natal ward,
there were many non-local mothers. I stayed in the hospital for three days and
two nights. Two Mandarin people shouted at the medical staff. One of them said
she had a child in Shenzhen, so she requested the pediatrician to allow her to
leave. The staff told her that the natal ICU was full and doctors were busy.
But she insisted. I couldn’t tolerate this and asked her not to disturb the
staff. Then the staff member moaned when cleaning my wound, telling me that
she was scolded by those Mainland mothers. They spoke Mandarin as if they
worked in the Mainland…and told me I was lucky to have my operation one day
earlier, because the following day a high-risk pregnant woman was rushed to
the emergency ward. She needed to have an emergency operation. The hospital
had to postpone all subsequent bookings!

