_**This post is part of our special coverage
on[Refugees](https://globalvoicesonline.org/specialcoverage/refugees/).**_

Two different organizations are focusing on the benefits and advantages of
online media and technology to aid refugees and improve their lives. The
first, [Refugees United](http://info.refunite.org/ "Refugees United"), uses
online databases that can be accessed through mobile platforms to reunite
refugees who have lost track of family members and the next,
[HKRefugeeInfoChannel](http://www.youtube.com/user/HKRefugeeInfoChannel "HK
Refugee Info channel on youtube") provides legal and welfare information to
refugees in Hong Kong through YouTube videos.

[Refugees United](http://info.refunite.org/ "refugees united website") started
off as a pilot in Northern Uganda that is now spreading to other African
countries and other areas of the world where natural disasters, political
unrest and violence have caused massed evacuations and people to get separated
from their kin and loved ones. Through an anonymous database, refugees can
create a profile where they can share details about their lives that will be
recognizable by kin who go online through a computer or [using
cellphones](http://vimeo.com/channels/refunite/18952455 "refugees united
mobile project video").

In [_Lost and Found_](http://vimeo.com/channels/refunite/24767782 "Lost and
Found video"), four refugees tell their stories of escape and loss, and what
it is like for them to go on with their lives not knowing about their loved
ones, not even if they are alive or dead. Although different NGOs have done
efforts in the past to reunite refugee families, handwritten papers and
photographs aren't easily shared by multiple organizations and across
international borders. With the ability to have an online repository that
different organizations and individuals can join and search through, the
possibility to unite families is increased.

In Hong Kong, a multilingual channel has become available through YouTube
videos for refugees to get answers to common questions on legal, health and
education issues. For example, in a video, Assistant Professor of Law at the
University of Hong Kong Kelley Loper explains what are the differences between
a refugee and an asylum seeker.

Or this video explains the process a refugee needs to follow if they need to
receive medical attention:

A successful reconnection story of refugees is told in the[ Refugees United
Blog](http://blog.refunite.org/post/21846703890/reconnection-story-
april-2012?939579a0 "reconnection stories"): a family separated in South Kivu
due to violence and who although they don't have their own phones with
internet access or funds to use internet cafes, have been able to use the
software through community liaisons to discover the whereabouts of family
members and find their kin. You can also follow the progress of Refugees
United through their[ Facebook page.](http://www.facebook.com/refunite
"Refugees United Facebook page")

_**This post is part of our special coverage
on[Refugees](https://globalvoicesonline.org/specialcoverage/refugees/).**_

