![](https://globalvoices.org/wp-content/uploads/2019/02/rector-800x530.jpg)

Dr. Mohamamd Sharif Fayez. Used with permission of the American University of
Afghanistan.

A few weeks ago, on a bracingly cold day in Kabul, a horde of freshman
students packed into a large auditorium for their orientation at Afghanistan’s
leading private university, the [American University of
Afghanistan](https://www.auaf.edu.af/) (AUAF).

“Ladies and gentlemen, please welcome,” the emcee roared, clearing his throat,
“Dr. Mohammad Sharif Fayez, the founder of the American University of
Afghanistan!”

Even as Dr. Fayez inched slowly towards the stage, betraying his physical
frailty, he commanded the complete attention of the young audience.

When he spoke, it was in a voice that was measured and tender.

“Before beginning my speech, I would like to ask you a question. What is
Academic Freedom?”

A deep silence engulfed the auditorium richly adorned with traditional hand-
crafted wall hangings. Uncertain whispers rose and fell, allowing the pause to
grow pregnant.

“Academic freedom,” Dr. Fayez continued, “is freedom of inquiry in an academic
environment that you [students] should have the freedom to communicate ideas
or facts without the fear of being targeted for repression. That you are free
to express your opinion without fear from institutional censorship or
discipline. That you are free to question your professor whenever you think
otherwise.”

Dr. Mohammad Sharif Fayez, a relentless educator, academic figure, and poet,
who was the former Minister of Higher Education and founder of AUAF, was
pronounced dead at 73 on February 8. He is survived by his wife and two
children.

The news of Dr. Fayez's death [brought with it a wave of grief and
mourning](http://<iframe
src="https://www.facebook.com/plugins/post.php?href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.facebook.com%2FAUAfghanistan%2Fposts%2F2746166775395300&width=500"
width="500" height="764" style="border:none;overflow:hidden" scrolling="no"
frameborder="0" allowTransparency="true" allow="encrypted-media"></iframe>)
for a statesman whose contribution to the gains made in Afghan education since
2001 is probably impossible to overestimate.

#### A story of turbulence and triumph

Born in 1946, Dr. Fayez hailed from Seyoshan village in the western province
of Herat. After graduating from Avicenna High School in Kabul, Dr. Fayez
received an MA in English Literature from the Northern Colorado University,
and a Ph.D. in American and Comparative Literature from the University of
Arizona in 1978.

His acclaimed doctoral dissertation epitomised his life's work bridging
Eastern and Western cultures of learning. In it he demonstrated the influence
of Rumi, a Persian poet of the 13th century, on the 19th century American
writer Walt Whitman.

In a 96-page memoir published in 2014 (An Undesirable Element: An Afghan
Memoir) Dr. Fayez wrote about the turbulence of his return to Afghanistan
following his studies abroad. Less than a year after he took up a teaching job
at Kabul University, the Soviet Union invaded Afghanistan, forcing him to join
thousands of others fleeing to Iran.

Once there, his arrival coincided with the onset of the Islamic Revolution
under the leadership of Grand Ayatollah Rohullah Khomeini. After five years of
scrapping for survival, he gratefully an offer from his Arizona alma mater to
serve as a visiting scholar.

During these most difficult times — the Afghan-Soviet war of the late 1980s,
the Afghan civil war of the early 1990s, and the Taliban government in the
1990s — Dr. Fayez emerged as one of the most prominent voices of resistance
among the Afghan diaspora. He authored hundreds of articles and advocated
tirelessly for human rights in his homeland.

When the Taliban was unseated by a US-led invasion in 2001, Dr. Fayez became
the new government's first Minister of Higher Education.

Reviled by conservatives and championed by progressives, he quickly went about
overhauling an education system that had been reduced to a shell by decades of
war and the extreme conservatism of the Taliban.

His reforms restored co-education to the country and saw six new universities
established, including the flagship American University of Afghanistan (AUAF).
Few politicians of the era can claim achievements comparable in scale.

#### **A legacy to inspire**

Following the tragic news of his passing politicians, scholars, activists,
writers and students rushed to honour Dr. Fayez and his extraordinary legacy.

President Ashraf Ghani described Dr. Fayez as “a brilliant professor, who
played a significant role in enlightening the society and adorning the young
generation of science and knowledge.”

AUAF President Dr. Kenneth Holland mourned the loss of “one of the
university's greatest friends”, whose vision would “live on through one of his
precious children, the American University of Afghanistan.”

Dr. Rangin Dadfar Spanta, a close friend of Dr. Fayez and a former National
Security Advisor,
[wrote](https://www.facebook.com/partaw.naderi/posts/638094899962294) in a
statement that the academic's “writing was powerful and his love for Persian
appreciable. He was one of the [great] Jami scholars of our country. This is a
huge loss for Afghanistan, a country too poor when it comes to such figures.”

Spanta was among a number of diaspora Afghans Dr. Fayez enthusiastically
implored to return to the country to help with his higher education revamp.

“He brought me back to Afghanistan to teach at Kabul University…I stayed, and
yet he left us all alone. I am deeply saddened,” Dr. Spanta said in his
statement.

Despite their young age, many of Dr. Fayez's students at the AUAF have already
gone on to take leadership roles in Afghan government and civil society,
becoming amplifiers of his progressive vision.

Sayed Madadi, who Dr. Fayez taught English Literature at AUAF, is now the
incumbent Director General of Afghanistan's Civil Service Institute in Kabul.

Madadi
[wrote](https://www.facebook.com/photo.php?fbid=2289025797795664&set=a.101604079871191&type=3&theater)
on Facebook: “Sharif Fayez was one of the best people of this country — a
serene, deep, and committed man who worked hard in silence. He used to think
more and speak less. He loved and valued questioning.”

My own encounters with Dr. Fayez on campus were fleeting but unforgettable. On
one occasion he engaged me outside his office as he was hurrying to a meeting.

“What do you want to do later, in your career?” he asked during the brief
exchange.

I told him that I was fascinated by political science, and wanted to continue
studying it.

“Great, then you should. I see you doing something great, not settling for
anything small,” he replied warmly, before continuing along his path.

They were a few kind words — the sort he had probably told plenty of others —
but charged with enough inspiration to last for generations.

Editor's note: Maisam Iltaf is a regular Global Voices contributor who works
and studies at the American University of Afghanistan.

