[![](https://globalvoices.org/wp-
content/uploads/2019/02/Sara-800x450.png)](https://groundviews.org/2019/02/06/a-day-
in-saraswathis-life-video/)

Saraswathi's story. Image via Groundviews.

_This post, which contains a video by Selvaraja Rajasegar,[originally
appeared](https://groundviews.org/2019/02/06/a-day-in-saraswathis-life-video/)
on Groundviews, an award-winning citizen journalism website in Sri Lanka. An
edited version is published below as part of a content-sharing agreement with
Global Voices._

38-year-old Saraswathi wakes at 5:30 am to send her children to school before
she heads to work.

Saraswathi’s story highlights [some of the
challenges](https://groundviews.org/2017/08/16/the-road-to-school-access-to-
education-in-the-plantation-sector/) faced by the
[Malaiyaha](https://caravanmagazine.in/lede/museum-sri-lanka-malaiyaha-tamils)
(plantation) Tamil community, who have lived and worked in Sri Lanka for over
[150 years](https://groundviews.org/2017/08/11/from-tamil-nadu-to-badulla-a-
century-in-the-tea-estates-of-sri-lanka/).

Parents often find it [difficult to
provide](https://groundviews.org/2017/08/28/roti-and-rice-examining-
imbalances-in-nutrition-for-children-in-the-estate-sector/) the meals required
for children under the government’s stipulated school-feeding plan — the roti
(bread) they eat regularly has almost no nutritional value, but is frequently
the only thing they can afford.

The Sri Lankan tea industry employs (directly or indirectly) over [1 million
people](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tea_production_in_Sri_Lanka). Many of
the [500,000 tea estate workers](https://www.ucanews.com/news/activists-issue-
warning-to-tea-industry/41663) are Tamils descended from cheap laborers
[brought to Sri Lanka from India](https://spark.adobe.com/page/lhDga3kElCqda/)
by the British colonial rulers in the 19th century, and more than half of the
workers are women.

The tea estate workers have been calling for an increase in their daily basic
wage to [Rs. 1000 (US$ 5.50) for
years](https://groundviews.org/2018/12/22/our-request-rs-1000-on-the-wage-
negotiations-for-estate-workers/). The Collective Wage Agreement – between
trade unions and Regional Plantation Companies – was recently signed, which
set the daily basic wage at Rs. 700 (US$ 3.90). This has been met with
widespread strikes by estate workers as well as solidarity protests in
Colombo.

**Read:[Sri Lankan tea estate workers take to the streets to demand fair
wages](https://globalvoices.org/2019/01/25/sri-lankan-tea-estate-workers-take-
to-the-streets-to-demand-fair-wages/)**

Regional Plantation Companies say that providing Rs. 1000 (US$ 5.50) per
working day is impossible. Although Ceylon Tea is one of Sri Lanka’s [top
exports](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tea_production_in_Sri_Lanka), the
industry has suffered heavy losses for a number of reasons, including climate
change. However, as Saraswathi’s story shows, the wages she earns are nowhere
near enough to bear the costs of providing for her family, and increasingly,
the younger generation of estate workers are forced to leave and look for work
elsewhere.

Watch the video:

> [சரஸ்வதியின் ஒருநாள்
> கதை](https://www.facebook.com/Maatram.org/videos/1214397015373993/)
>
> சரஸ்வதியின் ஒருநாள் கதை maatram.org/?p=7508 #MalayagaTamil
>
> Geplaatst door [Maatram](https://www.facebook.com/Maatram.org/) op Dinsdag 5
> februari 2019

