![](https://globalvoices.org/wp-
content/uploads/2017/09/CROPTrainandTunnel.jpg)

This work by Martí​n Ramírez is known as “Untitled (Train and Tunnels).”
Ramírez used crayons and glued together pieces of paper to make his drawings.
Credit: Courtesy Ricco/Maresca Gallery

_This story by[Gisele Regatao](https://www.pri.org/people/gisele-regatao)
originally[ ](http://www.pri.org/people/meradith-hoddinott)[appeared on
PRI.org](https://www.pri.org/stories/2017-08-24/anonymous-psych-patient-now-
acclaimed-master-artist-immigrant-experience) on August 24 2017. It is
republished here as part of a partnership between PRI and Global Voices._

A Mexican immigrant who was institutionalized in mental hospitals in Northern
California for more than 30 years is now considered by some critics to be one
of the best artists of the 20th century. And he’s getting his first major
retrospective in Los Angeles.

The Institute of Contemporary Art Los Angeles, or ICA LA, is opening its new
home on Sept. 9 with a show featuring about 50 drawings by Martín Ramírez, who
died in 1963 at the age of 68.

The show comes at a time when new research is questioning Ramírez’s label as
an “outsider” artist and is defining him as a master of the immigrant
experience.

“He is an immigrant artist. His art is very important to understand
displacement, to understand borders, how people cross borders,” says Victor
Espinosa, author of the book, “[Mart](http://www.amazon.in/Martin-Ramirez-
Framing-His-Life/dp/1477307753)[í](http://www.amazon.in/Martin-Ramirez-
Framing-His-Life/dp/1477307753)[n Ramírez: Framing His Life and
Art](http://www.amazon.in/Martin-Ramirez-Framing-His-Life/dp/1477307753).”

### ‘Me no loco’

Espinosa, who teaches at The Ohio State University, spent 10 years researching
Ramírez. And he questions whether Ramírez really was schizophrenic. According
to Espinosa, Ramírez was diagnosed after a brief psychiatric consultation
where there was no translator. But Ramírez didn’t speak English. Espinosa says
Ramírez kept saying, “Me no loco” (“I am not crazy”), but the doctors
concluded otherwise.

“With this kind of diagnosis, it’s impossible to leave the institution,”
Espinosa says. “Ramírez didn’t have anyone on his side to question the
diagnosis, to do anything.”

![](https://globalvoices.org/wp-content/uploads/2017/09/3.-Untitled-Horse-and-
Red-Rider-n.d..jpg)

This piece by Martín Ramírez is labeled as “Untitled (Horse and Red Rider).”
Credit: Courtesy of Ricco/Maresca Gallery

Ramírez moved to the United States for work in 1925, leaving behind a pregnant
wife and three kids in Jalisco, Mexico, to look for work in the railroads and
mines in California. A few years later, though, the economy crashed. And he
lost his job and started living in the streets.

That’s when the story gets a bit murky. According to Espinosa’s research,
Ramírez apparently misunderstood a letter from his family and cut ties with
them. He wound up homeless and destitute, and in 1931, he was picked up by
authorities. Espinosa says Ramírez was confused and probably depressed and
ended up institutionalized.

And he remained in mental institutions for the rest of his life.

While he was there, Ramírez began drawing Madonnas, cowboys, horses, trains
and tunnels — inspired by the churches and farms of his native Mexico, as well
as his journey to the United States. He didn’t have paint or canvases; he used
crayons and glued-together pieces of paper to create large drawings. Sometimes
he used collages from magazines. His tracing is figurative, but also modern.

Out of the perhaps thousands of drawings Ramírez made, about 500 have
survived.

One of his Madonnas now lies in a vault at the Library of Congress in
Washington, DC. Tracey Barton, a senior archives technician in the manuscripts
division, found the drawing in 2009, rolled up in a box of the belongings of
American designers Charles and Ray Eames.

“I have worked at the library for 35 years, so that’s pretty much the greatest
thing that happened to me here,” Barton says.

### The artist as a mythical figure

Ramírez’s art might never have been seen outside the mental hospital where he
lived if it hadn’t been for Tarmo Pasto, a professor who studied art made by
psychiatric patients. Pasto became interested in Ramírez’s drawings and helped
organize his first art show at the E.B. Crocker Art Gallery in Sacramento,
California, in 1952. But the drawings were presented as the work of an
anonymous schizophrenic patient, not an artist.

“That narrative is hard for the art world to unabsorb because it’s sexy and
enticing, and it reaffirms that the artist is some mythical figure,” says
Brooke Davis Anderson, director of the museum of the Pennsylvania Academy of
the Fine Arts, and curator of a major show about Ramírez at the Folk Art
Museum in New York in 2007. She says it’s time to change that narrative.

![](https://globalvoices.org/wp-content/uploads/2017/09/2.-Martin-Ramirez-
untitled-Collection-of-the-Library-of-Congress.jpg)

This Martín Ramírez drawing of a Madonna was found rolled up in a box of the
belongings of Charles and Ray Eames. Credit: Courtesy of the Library of
Congress

The fact that Ramírez was seen as a mythical figure also meant nobody looked
for his family until Victor Espinosa tracked them down in Mexico in 2000. The
family then sued to get the rights over Ramírez’s work. Frank Maresca is the
co-owner of the Ricco/Maresca Gallery in New York, which now represents the
estate for Ramirez’s 20 grandchildren. He says even though Ramírez’s major
works sell for a half-million dollars, and his drawings are in the collection
of some major New York museums like the Guggenheim Museum and the Museum of
Modern Art, others such as the Metropolitan Museum of Art or the Whitney
Museum of Modern Art don’t own a Ramírez.

“I think they believe it’s less than that which is produced, that comes out of
the academy,” Maresca says. “I can’t think of any other reason about why it
hasn’t happened. There is no other reason.”

Donna De Salvo, a senior curator at the Whitney, acknowledges the shortcoming.
“We probably are behind, frankly,” she says. “There are a number of Latinx
artists who are not in our collection, and it’s something we are very aware of
and we are working on bringing some consultants who have the expertise.”

Victor Espinosa says you won’t find Ramírez’s work in any museums in Mexico,
either. The Regional Museum of Guadalajara, close to Ramírez’s hometown, said
they have no information about the artist.

They apparently aren’t aware that the US Postal Service released a set of
[five commemorative Mart](https://about.usps.com/news/national-
releases/2015/pr15_018.htm)[í](http://about.usps.com/news/national-
releases/2015/pr15_018.htm)[n Ramírez](https://about.usps.com/news/national-
releases/2015/pr15_018.htm)[ ](http://about.usps.com/news/national-
releases/2015/pr15_018.htm)stamps in 2015.

The only other Mexican artist believed to have been honored that way was Frida
Kahlo.

