![](https://globalvoices.org/wp-
content/uploads/2017/10/10071756465_8b7385efb1_h_0-800x533.jpg)

In places such as Bukhara, the language encountered — still ostensibly a
variation of Persian — would be near incomprehensible to someone with
knowledge of “colloquial Persian.” The same goes for Afghanistan and even Iran
itself. The formal Persian of the media is virtually identical across borders,
while the spoken dialects vary tremendously on a city-by-city, village-by-
village basis. (Photo: Sergio Tittarini via Flickr, CC BY-NC 2.0)

**_The following is a[partner post ](http://www.eurasianet.org/node/85516)from
[EurasiaNet.org](http://www.eurasianet.org/) written by [James Pickett.
](http://www.eurasianet.org/taxonomy/term/7066)Republished with permission._**

Is Tajik a dialect of Persian? Or a language in its own right? What
differentiates it from varieties prevalent in Afghanistan and Iran? There is
no easy answer to these questions because the very categories we use to think
about language in Central Asia, and elsewhere, are insufficient.

Consider these paradoxes: A student trained in modern Persian at an American
or European university would have no trouble understanding Tajik-medium news
on the radio, even though he or she would initially be unable to read the
Cyrillic script of print publications. And at bazaars in places such as
Bukhara or Khujand, the language encountered — still ostensibly Tajik — would
be near incomprehensible to someone with knowledge of “colloquial Persian.”
The same goes for Afghanistan and even Iran itself. The formal language of the
media is virtually identical (excepting the alphabet in the Tajik case) across
borders, while the spoken dialects vary tremendously on a city-by-city,
village-by-village basis.

This basic insight is taken for granted by scholars with years of experience
studying Persian (by its various names) and living in Iran and Central Asia.
But it is a language framework missing from most Persian textbooks and
actively subordinated to an explicitly national way of understanding language
dynamics in the region.

The language categories we are more or less stuck with are organized
vertically by nation-state, which at once obscures the profound variation of
local dialects (Mazandarani, Bukhari, Kabuli, and many others), while
simultaneously implying deep differentiation by country that does not in fact
exist, among Farsi, Dari and Tajik.

Prior to the 20th century, Persian served as a remarkably uniform language of
high culture from the Balkans to western China, in no way confined to the
modern country of Iran. Much like Latin in Europe or Sanskrit in India, it was
a literary language that many educated people could write, but far fewer spoke
as a native tongue. Crucially, the language was known as Persian (Farsi)
everywhere, and the written language formed the basis for the modern languages
of Dari and Tajik as well — terms rarely used to describe a language before
the 20th century. (“Tajik” was used to refer to people, but not language; and
“Dari” was used in medieval texts to refer to Persian, but without any
exclusive relationship to modern Dari or Afghanistan, despite nationalist
claims to the contrary).

So if literary Persian formed the basis of all of these languages, just what
is so Tajik about the Tajik language? (The same point applies to Dari and
Farsi). This question is complicated by the inadequacy of our categories. If
one has in mind the formal Tajik of the media and language textbooks, the
answer is “not much,” aside from the alphabet. And a separate alphabet does
not a language make: otherwise the recent script reform in Uzbekistan from
Cyrillic to Latin would have effectively invented a new language.

A smattering of grammatical forms specific to Central Asia though not
necessarily exclusive to Tajikistan were codified into grammar manuals during
the Soviet era, and consequently survive in contemporary English-medium
language textbooks.

For instance, “man rafta istāda būdam” (“I was going”) appears alongside the
literary variant, even though that construction would make little sense in
Tehran. Vocabulary is overwhelmingly etymologically Persian, with Turkic and
Russian loanwords mostly excised from such language manuals. Students who
master the contents of Tajik textbooks — the most widespread options are by
Baizoyev and Khojayori respectively — would therefore be prepared to converse
with well-educated colleagues in Iran, Tajikistan, and Afghanistan.

It is true that slang and neologisms would pose a challenge when moving among
the three countries. If one wished to say “satellite,” Tajik dictionaries
offer “hamsafar,” and Farsi dictionaries “mahvāra,” for instance. But there is
no escape from the learning curve associated with engaging in specialized
domains. Moreover, rigidly adhering to one national language is no panacea, as
foreign loan words for technical terms complicate the picture further.
Returning to the example of “satellite,” most Tajiks would probably not use
either of the previously mentioned variants, and instead use the Russian term,
“sputnik.”

In other words, the predominant pedagogical approach is a good fit for
diplomats, journalists, and literature scholars. Step outside the elite
circle, however, and this picture changes dramatically. If by “Tajik” one has
in mind the language of the hearth and bazaar, then it turns out there are
many varieties of Persian.

Dialects common in Central Asia freely mix not only Persian, Turkic, and
Russian words, but grammatical forms and sentence structure as well. Students
who achieve high marks in a Tajik program may be surprised to find that the
living language they encounter in Bukhara — where the local dialect is
understood as “Tajik” — is very close to unintelligible. To engage on that
level, one would have to study language as it is spoken, rather than the
language as reformists wish it were spoken.

Nor is this situation limited to the former Soviet republics of Central Asia.
Although education in formal Persian has penetrated much more deeply in Iran
(not having to compete with the imperial language of Russian), Iran is home to
a spectrum of local dialects, some arguably more pronounced even than those
found in Central Asia. The same is true in Afghanistan, where languages such
as Pashto and English provide ingredients for the local dialects.

Students wishing to engage with these colloquial forms are mostly out of luck.
Language textbooks and programs strictly hew to the tripartite Farsi-Dari-
Tajik division, and when “colloquial” elements are introduced, the variant in
mind is that of Tehran, masquerading as a common spoken dialect for the
language as a whole. There are a few examples of exceptions to this rule, such
as the insightful, but difficult to obtain, guide to colloquial Tajik by Aliev
and Okawa (Colloquial Tajiki Phrasebook, 2009). For the most part, the
anthropologist and development worker (for whom formal Persian may be less
useful) are on their own.

This need not be the case. If there is one thing that historical scholarship
of the last several decades has demonstrated, it is that what we understand
today as “nations” and “ethnicities” are the product of contested, and often
very recent, historical processes. Those insights have yet to filter into
language pedagogy in any meaningful way, but it is not too hard to imagine an
alternative approach.

Indeed, just such an integrated approach is already on offer – for Arabic.
Most Arabic programs focus on the formal language prevalent throughout the
Arab world, while concurrently offering targeted introductions to various
regional dialects, with special attention to the most prevalent one – that of
Cairo. It is taken for granted that students’ journeys are not over at the end
of the integrated program, since they will by necessity have to use the formal
language as a platform for further specialization in a local dialect,
technical field, or literary genre.

The only thing holding Persian back from a similar approach is the tenacity of
national categories. An integrated pedagogy presenting a shared formal
language transcending national boundaries, combined with exposure to regional
and historical diversity, would better prepare language learners for realities
encountered on the ground, and help undermine the conceptual silos of the
nation-state.

For now, the DIY version of such an approach is not impossible, but certainly
challenging due to a lack of materials. Students would have to strain to
cobble together resources across dialects under a bewildering array of
contradictory headings. But even a basic appreciation of the limitations of
our perceived language categories opens the door to a far more diverse and
interesting world.

Editor's note: James Pickett is an Assistant Professor in History at the
University of Pittsburgh. … Interested in the gory details underpinning the
arguments presented here? This article is adapted from: James Pickett,
“Categorically Misleading, Dialectically Misconceived: Language Textbooks and
Pedagogic Participation in Central Asian Nation-Building Projects,” Central
Asian Survey, May 2017.

