![](https://globalvoices.org/wp-content/uploads/2017/09/Screen-
Shot-2017-09-09-at-17.35.24-800x532.jpg)

A performance at ƏSA, the first theater in Azerbaijan dedicated to bringing
together actors with and without disabilities. Photo by Famil Mahmudbeyli.

**_The following is a[partner post](http://www.eurasianet.org/node/84831) from
[EurasiaNet.org](http://www.eurasianet.org/) written by [Durna
Safarova](http://www.eurasianet.org/taxonomy/term/5941). Republished with
permission._**

“Do not be ashamed of your own body. Do not be shy because of your body, no
matter what shape it is,” the man says, stripping off his shirt as the
audience watches, rapt.

The man on stage, a painter with schizophrenia, is one of the characters in
DUMB, a psychological drama performed at ƏSA (“walking stick” in Azerbaijani),
the first theater in Azerbaijan dedicated to bringing together actors with and
without disabilities.

As in many places, people with disabilities in Azerbaijan face stereotypes and
prejudices portraying them as dependent, incompetent and unhappy. ƏSA’s
founder, Nihad Gulamzade, said he founded the theater – the first of its kind
in the Caucasus – to fight those misperceptions.

“This is not a social project, it’s not a hobby, we are working
professionally,” Gulamzade told EurasiaNet.org.

Gulamzade, an accomplished actor, musician, and photographer, does not have a
disability. He describes the inspiration for the theater as coming during a
period of deep depression. He was contemplating suicide, he said, but imagined
what would happen if his attempt were unsuccessful. “I would live my whole
life as a disabled person and wouldn’t be able to act,” he recalled thinking.

DUMB, which opened last September, was ƏSA’s first production. The theater
also has put on a production of Shakespeare’s A Midsummer Night’s Dream,
partially funded by the British Embassy in Azerbaijan, which oversold the
theater’s 370-person capacity. “If we had a 1,000-seat hall, I think we could
fill it,” said Gulamzade.

The theater’s success is due not just to the novelty of featuring actors with
disabilities, but a more creative approach to the stage, Gulamzade said: “The
theater scene in Azerbaijan was colorless. We tried to make it lively, and it
worked.”

In Baku, where there had been only three independent theater collectives
before ƏSA launched, the appearance of a new group was a welcome addition to
the city’s cultural life, said Aliya Dadashova, a local theater critic. “The
theater scene is not as lively as it was in the early 1990s, when there were
more small theater collectives,” she told EurasiaNet.org. “The state theaters
don’t have any social or cultural impact, so it’s gratifying to see new
initiatives” like ƏSA.

“We unite people from different social groups. You can see government figures
and their political opposition watching us. There were people who are theater
fans, and people whose first experience was ƏSA,” added actor Orkhan Adigozel.
Adigozel is paralyzed as a result of an accident nine years ago, and ƏSA is
his first experience with the theater.

“On stage we are just actors,” Adigozel said. “We try to make the audience
focus on the play, rather than disability. There is a stereotype that people
with disabilities are not able to do anything. We broke this stereotype and
try to show that art has no barriers.”

The crew has 15 members, representing a variety of disabilities. Some have
cerebral palsy, one does not have legs, another has Down’s Syndrome. A sign
language interpreter makes the performances accessible to people who are deaf.

Life for people with disabilities in Azerbaijan has long been full of
obstacles, though that is gradually changing. In 2015, the government built a
12-story apartment complex with 132 apartments for visually impaired people.
The government also has passed legislation providing accessible
transportation, housing, treatment and rehabilitation for people with
disabilities. The government operates 16 rehabilitation centers, but advocates
for people with disabilities say that is not enough to meet the demand in
Azerbaijan.

For ƏSA’s actors, transportation is a particular problem. Roads, buses, and
taxis are rarely wheelchair-friendly; the only wheelchair-accessible taxis are
operated by the government backed Baku Taxi Company, known for its purple,
London-style cabs. But one ride costs 20 manats (about $12). Half of the
theater’s production budget is devoted to taxis, Gulumzade said. “If one actor
in a wheelchair pays 20 manats and he has to come to at least 30 rehearsals,
see how much the cost of transport is for a single person,” he said.

Azerbaijani law requires at least three percent of the workforce of state
agencies to be people with disabilities, but this is rarely enforced. Overall,
only 5.6 percent of Azerbaijan’s 540,000 people with disabilities are
employed.

Gulnar Alfidatli, a 23-year-old actress at ƏSA, has cerebral palsy. She has an
accounting degree and had a job at a private company, but was fired, she said,
after her bosses realized she had a disability. “ƏSA is my first theatre
experience,” she said. She recalled her first performance, which got a
standing ovation. “It was like we were in a magical dream,” she said.

