[![](https://es.globalvoices.org/wp-
content/uploads/2018/03/29425346_579513815734621_4445888088311597032_n-800x450.jpg)](https://www.facebook.com/solidariosinfronteras/)

Students eating breakfast at school. Photo by Faten for Solidarios sin
Fronteras. Used with permission.

[With the acute lack of
resources](https://www.atlanticcouncil.org/blogs/menasource/yemen-s-
humanitarian-crisis-persists-despite-humanitarian-funding) caused by the war
in Yemen, a growing number of families are forced but to take their children
out of school. Girls are often sent away to
[marry](https://www.unfpa.org/news/families-increasingly-resort-child-
marriage-yemen%E2%80%99s-conflict-grinds) at ages as young as 13. However, one
school in the capital Sana'a found a modest, yet effective, form of relief.

The NGO [Solidarios sin Fronteras](http://www.solidariosinfronteras.org/)
(based in Spain and Yemen) run almost entirely by volunteers and funded
primarily by [individual
donations](https://www.teaming.net/solidariossinfronteras-
desayunosparaeducaryprotegerenyemen-?lang=es_ES) — some as small as one euro
per month—, has started to provide a complete breakfast for this school's girl
students, who are aged six to 16. Before the project began, one-fifth of them
had been absent. Little by little, they started to come back and, since
September 2018, all 525 students are regularly attending classes, Solidarios’
founders say.

I've spoken via Whatsapp with two of the NGO's founders, Eva, who I had
previously met in person some years ago in Barcelona, and Faten, who is in
Yemen. They told me about how their project [“Breakfasts to educate and
protect”](http://www.solidariosinfronteras.org/educacion/) came about. They
also asked me to not disclose their full names or the name of the school for
security concerns.

In March, 2018, one of the school's teachers reached out to Faten about an
8-year-old girl who seemed to grow thinner and more exhausted by the day.
Suddenly, she stopped attending school. She had not been the first to quit,
but she was the youngest. The teacher talked to the family: they were in
extreme financial need and had received offers to marry their daughter.

When speaking with Faten, the teacher wondered whether a daily food ration
could motivate families to keep their daughters in school. And the idea was
born. Faten says:

> Most of [these girls are] daughters of workers of the textile factory, which
> was completely destroyed [in the bombings]. The families haven't [had any]
> salary for 3 years. How could they cover food expenses? […] The most
> important thing is that we're supporting them to complete their education.
> Their families [are also] happy, as keeping them at school prevents them
> from staying at home or getting married at such a young age.

In March 2018, the United Nations declared the humanitarian crisis in Yemen
[the worst in the world](https://news.un.org/en/focus/yemen). With raging
unemployment and inflation, 80 percent of the country's families are in debt
and 65 percent [struggle to buy
food](http://files.unicef.org/yemen/Yemen2Years-
children_falling_through_the_cracks.pdf).

**Read more:** [In Yemen, war, bad management, and climate change are at fault
for water shortage](https://globalvoices.org/2018/10/03/in-yemen-war-bad-
management-and-climate-change-are-at-fault-for-water-shortage/)

Solidarios sin Fronteras consulted with a pediatrician to design the
breakfast's menu. Faten shops for groceries every morning and a married couple
uses her kitchen to prepare, pack and transport the food. During a 45-minute
break at work, she rushes to the school to help the teachers distribute the
meals. Sometimes, her siblings come to help out, too.

This do-it-yourself spirit is true for the organization's three other
programs. With “[Food aid for
families](https://www.migranodearena.org/en/cause/16425/emergencia-
humanitaria-en-yemen-ayuda-urgente-a-familias-5-campaa),” they distribute food
packages for vulnerable families in the cities of Sanaa, Aden, Amran, Raydah,
Hodeidah, Al Dorihimi, and displaced families from Taiz. “[Water for
Yemen](https://www.teaming.net/ssf-aguayemen?lang=en_UK)” maintains water
reservoirs in the Amran and Raydah camps for internally displaced persons and
“[Rebuilding Socotra](https://solidariosinfronteras.org/reconstruir-socotra/)”
provides cement for rebuilding houses and dig wells in the island of Socotra,
devastated by hurricanes in 2015.

### “What if we do it ourselves?”

![](https://es.globalvoices.org/wp-
content/uploads/2018/03/desayunos-800x450.jpg)

Prepared breakfasts are distributed every morning at the school. Photo by
Faten for Solidarios sin Fronteras (Solidarity without Borders). Used with
permission.

It was on a trip to Yemen Eva took in 2012 that she met Faten. Eva was
watching a birthday party at the next table at a cafe in Sana'a and the
birthday girl offered her cake. The girl was Faten. They became friends and
have seen each other several times since, most recently in 2015, on Eva's
latest trip to Sana'a. Faten remembers:

> A few weeks after the war began, I was on WhatsApp (as usual) and I asked
> Eva, “can we do something to help?”. She answered that she would look for an
> organization in Spain with her friend Noèlia, and I was to look for one here
> in Yemen.

Eva, who has 15 years of experience in international development, could not
find any grassroots NGO working in Yemen that she could trust. So she and
Faten, along with a third friend Noèlia, decided to create their own that same
year.

The three women are a volunteer executive team and count with support from
trusted volunteers in both countries. Eva and Noèlia, who are based in Spain,
take care of fundraising: they rely on [social
media](https://www.facebook.com/solidariosinfronteras/),
[radio](https://www.ivoox.com/entrevista-a-eva-erill-noelia-ruiz-de-audios-
mp3_rf_23309894_1.html), the [print
press](https://www.elperiodico.com/es/sociedad/20160614/eva-erill-un-like-no-
da-agua-a-un-nino-refugiado-un-euro-si-5206002) and
[lectures](https://www.youtube.com/watch?time_continue=3&v=U7nCteNWQXY) to
spread the word about their work and attract contributors. Most people donate
online and SSF crowdfunds each project separately. Faten is responsible for
administering the ground operations — often from her own house. The three of
them make up the executive team and juggle their tasks in the NGO with their
daily jobs.

They regularly [share
photographs](https://www.instagram.com/solidariosinfronteras/),
[videos](https://www.facebook.com/solidariosinfronteras), and [detailed
updates](https://twitter.com/solidariosSF) on the SSF's social media pages.
They also circulate content to raise awareness about the war in Yemen, in
particular, the role of [Spain](https://www.aljazeera.com/news/2018/09/spain-
turn-sell-400-missiles-saudi-arabia-180913144811033.html) and other countries
who [supply arms](https://edition.cnn.com/2018/11/22/middleeast/arms-exports-
saudi-arabia-intl/index.html) used in the conflict.

