![](https://globalvoices.org/wp-
content/uploads/2018/11/nyaruach-2-800x533.jpg)

Nyaruach. Photo by Tania Campbell-Golding, used with permission.

A man named Gatluak is probably feeling a bit embarrassed as South Sudanese
singer Nyaruach calls him out for being a “boring man with no plan” in a hit
song shared widely since its release in June 2018. Or, rather several Gatluaks
— the name is common in South Sudan and “all know a Gatluak [who behaves this
way]”, Nyaruach says.

With fierce feminist messaging, Nyaruach's playful song reclaims a woman's
dignity after getting burned in love. It also reminds the world that vibrant
music and art emerge out of
[Kakuma](https://www.bostonglobe.com/news/bigpicture/2018/07/07/kakuma-
refugee-camp/WA4vybjw2gpDMns0bn5VpN/story.html) Refugee Camp in northern
Kenya, one of the[ largest refugee camps](https://www.unhcr.org/ke/kakuma-
refugee-camp) in the region.

Nyaruach, a single mother of two who lives in Kakuma, told Global Voices
during a Skype interview:

> South Sudanese men fail women with the wrong kind of love. So, my message is
> to the young girls of the new generation … Love is killing the new
> generation.

The catchy song and music video, which features some of Nyaruach's Kakuma co-
residents, released in November 2018, caught the world's attention for its
hypnotic Afro-beats and bold lyrics.

> Ladies… there is nothing worse than a boring man, with no plan 😝. Gatluak
> pick up your phone ?!? 📞😂💥😂 New video and album with my brother
> [@emmanueljal](https://twitter.com/EmmanuelJAL?ref_src=twsrc%5Etfw) out now.
> Click on my bio ☝🏾 Naath Album | Gatluak
> [#southsudan](https://twitter.com/hashtag/southsudan?src=hash&ref_src=twsrc%5Etfw)
> [#afropop](https://twitter.com/hashtag/afropop?src=hash&ref_src=twsrc%5Etfw)
> [#afrobeats](https://twitter.com/hashtag/afrobeats?src=hash&ref_src=twsrc%5Etfw)
> [#wewantpeace](https://twitter.com/hashtag/wewantpeace?src=hash&ref_src=twsrc%5Etfw)…
> <https://t.co/jClCIZhH9Y>
>
> — Nyaruach (@nyaruachmusic) [November 19,
> 2018](https://twitter.com/nyaruachmusic/status/1064529051216429057?ref_src=twsrc%5Etfw)

Gatluak bought her cold drinks, they went on long walks, and then
[ghosted](https://www.urbandictionary.com/define.php?term=Ghosting) her! “You
refuse to pick my phone after you get what you want. You are such a bastard
guy, I just want to say goodbye! May God bless you where you are. You boring
man — with no plan. With no plan!” sings Nyaruach.

“Gatluak” is the second release on the album NAATH (“humans” in Nuer) produced
by Nyaruach and her brother Emmanuel Jal, a hip-hop artist who gained
notoriety after his autobiography, “War Child: A Child Soldier's Story”, was
published in 2009. As children, the siblings were [forced
apart](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=AqOtvB7X3pM) through extreme
circumstances.

The two draw on Nuer traditional folk and love songs and interlace them with
addictive dance beats. “We can’t forget our culture”, Nyaruach said. “We have
to remind the new generation about the past — and music makes people happy.”

Nyaruach and Jal named the album NAATH after the “glorious [Kingdom of
Kush](https://www.nationalgeographic.com/archaeology-and-
history/magazine/2016/11-12/ancient-egypt-nubian-kingdom-pyramids-sudan/)” of
the Nile as an antidote to images of war and poverty that have characterized
South Sudan.

![](https://globalvoices.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/11/CD-Frontcover-
Naath1.1.png)

### A long road to music

Nyaruach was born in 1983 in Tonj, Sudan and separated from her family at the
age of four when her mother died. Her brother Jal was [taken as a
child](https://noisey.vice.com/en_us/article/rqgyxr/emmanuel-jal-south-
sudanese-child-soldier-who-jams-with-nile-rodgers) by the Sudan People’s
Liberation Army and forced to fight. He was then taken to Kenya at the age of
11 [with the help of a British aid
worker](https://www.theguardian.com/world/2005/mar/20/arts.sudan) who was
married to then-senior SPLA commander [Riek
Machar](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Riek_Machar "Riek Machar"). **** There
he discovered hip-hop, which he used to encourage peace.

Nyaruach's life took a different turn. She spent several tumultuous years with
relatives and ran away from an abusive father at the age of 10, surviving
several arduous escapes from Sudan, first to Ethiopia and later, to Kenya.

South Sudan [gained
independence](https://www.nytimes.com/2011/07/10/world/africa/10sudan.html)
from Sudan in July 2011, after a 22-year long civil war (1983-2005). The peace
did not last long despite major investments in South Sudan's development. In
2013, armed conflict broke out in Juba, the capital of South Sudan. This
spread to other areas of the country, gradually turning into an inter-ethnic
[conflict](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/South_Sudanese_Civil_War#Initial_mutiny_\(2013\))
between the country’s two largest ethnic groups: the Dinka, represented by
President Salva Kiir Mayardit, and the Nuer, represented by then-Vice
President Riek Machar.

Nyaruach did not reunite with Jal until they met in Nairobi. They collaborated
on a song called [Gua](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=nAtMME7Vv88), or
“peace” in the Nuer language. She was 22. The song was a hit in Kenya in 2005
and a breakthrough song for Jal, who went on to become an award-winning
musician and peace activist.

Jal also faced [criticism](https://paanluelwel.com/2015/05/18/emmanuel-jal-a-
peace-soldier-beating-south-sudanese-war-drums/) for contradicting his role
model status with using social media to air divisive views that stoked ethnic
tensions when conflict erupted in South Sudan in 2013.

In 2015, Nyaruach traveled to South Sudan for a short visit. Upon her return,
she spoke out against the violence she witnessed. Pregnant with her second
child, she decided to shift to Kakuma, seeking security.

Kakuma Refugee Camp was originally established by the UNHCR in 1992 to host
20,000 Sudanese children and youth known later as the [“Lost Boys of
Sudan”](http://www.pbs.org/pov/lostboysofsudan/video-lostboysofsudan/) fleeing
violence during the Second Sudanese Civil War.

Today, over 56 percent of the population of Kakuma and neighboring Kalobeyei
settlement are from South Sudan. At the end of January 2018, the camps hosted
a total of 185,449 registered refugees and asylum-seekers.

Nyaruach said that living in a refugee camp is especially hard on women with
children.

> They give us firewood for a month, it finishes after seven days. We need to
> eat our meal, we wake up at 4 a.m. to steal. Yes, we have to steal it — and
> it's very dangerous. They rape us, they can even shoot and kill us. But we
> can't report. Who is going to report? We have no voice or authority.

Enduring years of hardship has taken at toll on Nyaruach's spirit. Reuniting
and making music with Jal has felt like salvation. “I have a heart of
singing”, says Nyaruach. “Jal taught me how to rhyme.”

### ‘Woman have no rights’

Nyaruach's song uplifts women and girls in South Sudan who she says have “no
rights, no matter how young you are” in a [recent interview](https://www.the-
star.co.ke/news/2018/11/26/i-was-raped-by-cop-while-i-sought-asylum-
nyaruach_c1852129) with Kenya's The Star.

South Sudanese women are among the most marginalized, and the conflict has
made conditions untenable. More than [80
percent](https://reliefweb.int/report/south-sudan/women-and-future-south-
sudan-local-insights-building-inclusive-constituencies) of those who have fled
the violence in South Sudan are women and children.

> [
> ](https://www.instagram.com/p/Ba6tDPYlDZl/?utm_source=ig_embed&utm_medium=loading)

