![](https://globalvoices.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/11/Screen-
Shot-2018-11-26-at-11.19.37-PM.png)

A webcomic by Gump n Hell retelling the plight of Nuril. Used with permission.
Captions translated below.

A woman was sentenced to [six months in
prison](http://www.thejakartapost.com/news/2018/11/14/jailed-for-reporting-
her-sexual-offender-mataram-woman-cries-for-help.html) by Indonesia's Supreme
Court in early November for recording a sexually explicit phone call she
received from her boss, who had been harassing her at work.

Public outrage over the verdict has forced the Office of the Attorney General
to temporarily suspend her imprisonment.

Baiq Nuril Maknun, a 37-year-old mother of three and teacher at Mataram in
West Nusa Tenggara (NTB) Province, was reported by the school’s head master
for defamation in 2017 after she recorded a phone conversation in which he
boasted of his sexual relationship with another teacher at the school. After
she shared the recording with another colleague, it circulated on a WhatsApp
messaging group. Indonesian law does not address the legality of recording a
phone call without both parties’ prior consent.

Nuril said that the head master, who is named Muslim (it is common in
Indonesia for a person to be known by a single name) would harass and
proposition her, often
[bragging](http://www.thejakartapost.com/news/2018/11/14/jailed-for-reporting-
her-sexual-offender-mataram-woman-cries-for-help.html) about his sexual
relations with another teacher at school. On several occasions, she said he
invited her to meet him at a hotel for a “tryst”. She did not report the
harassment, for fear of losing her job.

But then she began to hear rumors that she herself was maintaining an
extramarital relationship with her superior. She decided to record her phone
conversations with her boss, in an effort to gather evidence of what was
happening, in case she should need to assert her innocence. But the recording
was posted by one of Nuril’s colleagues on WhatsApp and eventually reached
many members of the school community. Muslim was forced to resign, but was
[later hired](http://www.thejakartapost.com/news/2018/11/14/jailed-for-
reporting-her-sexual-offender-mataram-woman-cries-for-help.html) by a local-
level youth and sport agency.

![](https://globalvoices.org/wp-
content/uploads/2018/11/saveibunuril_gumpnhell1.jpeg)

A webcomic by [Gump n Hell](https://www.facebook.com/GumpnHell/) retelling the
plight of Nuril. Used with permission.

Comic translation, by panel, starting at top left. 1. Baiq Nuril, a former
administrative teacher of SMAN 7 state high school, mother of three, a sexual
harassment victim. 2. The man has verbally harassed her since mid-2012. Tired
of being accused of having extramarital affairs with the man, she recorded one
of his calls, but didn't report it out of fear of losing her job. 3. Her
colleague posted the recording on a WhatsApp group. Out of shame, her boss
pressed charges against her using UU ITE. 4. Mataram District Court dismissed
her from all charges, but Supreme Court punished her, while her harasser got a
promotion within the City of Mataram. 5. The children discuss how other sexual
violence victims are being sidelined by the justice system.

In retaliation, Muslim sued Nuril for defamation. The Mataram District Court
acquitted Nuril and declared her to be a victim of sexual harassment. But the
prosecution appealed the ruling in the Indonesian Supreme Court which found
that Nuril had violated the Electronic Information and Transactions (UU ITE)
law, which falls under Indonesia's criminal code.

The court found that Nuril was guilty under two sections of Article 27 of the
ITE law. The first criminalizes “deliberately and without permission creating/
distributing/ making available online a pornographic content”, while the
second addresses “deliberately and without permission creating/ distributing/
making available online an online content that contains insults/defamation.”

In addition to serving a six-month prison sentence, Nuril was ordered to pay a
fine of 500 billion Rupiah (nearly USD $34,000). Public school teachers in NTB
province typically earn USD $125 per month.

### **The campaign to #SaveIbuNuril**

Various groups have helped launch the #SaveIbuNuril campaign aimed at
defending Nuril’s freedom. Indonesians call someone “Ibu” as a sign of respect
and affection for a female teacher, or an older maternal figure.

An [online petition](https://www.change.org/p/jokowi-beri-amnesti-untuk-bu-
nuril-
amnestiuntuknuril/sign?utm_medium=email&utm_source=aa_sign&utm_campaign=455941&utm_content=&sfmc_tk=1HapyyssBrfriDvG2c9c3Snq7DUdgxzh7tminhXFvrbMO%2bgHURxrprO5FMx3x8AI&j=455941&sfmc_sub=267052245&l=32_HTML&u=65840448&mid=7259821&jb=499)
demanding President Joko Widodo (Jokowi) grant amnesty to Nuril has been
signed by more than 162,000 people.

But despite the overwhelming public support for Nuril, Jokowi says he won't
[intervene](http://www.thejakartapost.com/news/2018/11/20/jokowi-wont-grant-
nuril-amnesty.html) with the Supreme Court's decision. He has advised Nuril to
seek a case review or apply for _grasi_ (presidential clemency) when her
punishment is in force.

The Institute for Criminal Justice Reform (ICJR)
[criticized](https://www.cnnindonesia.com/nasional/20181115172505-12-346896/icjr-
desak-jokowi-berikan-amnesti-untuk-baiq-nuril) the president's statement and
questioned his commitment to protect women and other victims of sexual
harassment in the country.

A crowdfunding campaign was also
[initiated](https://kitabisa.com/saveibunuril) to pay Nuril’s fine. As of this
writing, the campaign has already raised USD $22,500.

### **Advocates seek repeal of defamation law**

Nuril’s case has further highlighted the need to review Article 27 of the UU
ITE law. According to the Southeast Asia Freedom of Expression Network
(SAFENet), this provision is often used by those in government to silence
their critics. SAFENet has monitored 245 cases linked to the UU ITE law, 174
of which are defamation-related.

Responding to the petition to reform the UU ITE law, Indonesian Minister of
Communication and Information (Menkominfo) Rudiantara
[emphasized](https://katadata.co.id/berita/2018/11/17/hormati-putusan-ma-
rudiantara-minta-usut-penyebar-konten-guru-nuril) that while he sympathizes
with Nuril's plight, he insisted that the law needs no revisions. He added
that the police should track down the real culprit who spread the recording
made by Nuril. His response worried digital rights groups, who fear the vague
law will not be amended and that more victims may face the same fate as Nuril
in the future.

When I spoke with a representative of the Association of Victims of UU ITE
([PakuITE](https://twitter.com/pakuite)), they explained why the law is
repressive:

> The application of UU ITE is ineffective, the articles of the law are open
> to many interpretation. They're unnecessary, and methodically used to target
> critics and those who are vocal against the governments’ policies, those who
> seek justice. The government is actively asking the inputs from the public
> regarding their work performances. But how can we do that if we're risked
> being punished for our online updates? Our data shows that 90% of the time
> the law is being used to counter sue, to threaten, and used as vengeance,
> and to silence individuals.

Succumbing to the public pressure, the Office of the Attorney General decided
on 19 November 2018 to
[postpone](https://nasional.kompas.com/read/2018/11/19/22420301/kejagung-
tunda-eksekusi-penahanan-baiq-nuril) [Nuril’s
punishment](https://nasional.kompas.com/read/2018/11/19/22420301/kejagung-
tunda-eksekusi-penahanan-baiq-nuril).

In the meantime, there have been no legal measures taken against Muslim,
despite the first instance court ruling and evidence that he sexually harassed
multiple teachers who were once among his staff. Mataram, the city where he is
now employed as chief of the Division of Youth and Sport, has [vowed not to
take action](http://lombokpost.net/2018/11/22/muslim-masih-duduk-manis/)
against him.

