![](https://globalvoices.org/wp-
content/uploads/2018/11/22092901_10159286588685621_2067236662_o-800x600.jpg)

Igor Toshevski, [Territory](https://toshevski.weebly.com/territories.html),
Plostad Makedonija, Skopje, 2009. Copyright the artist.

[Jon Blackwood](http://www.jonblackwood.net) is a curator of contemporary art,
writer and lecturer at Gray’s School of Art, Robert Gordon University in
Aberdeen. He divides his time between Scotland and the Balkans, researching
contemporary art in the ex-Yugoslav space, in particular in Macedonia and
[Bosnia and Herzegovina](https://openair.rgu.ac.uk/handle/10059/2228). His
book [_Critical Art in Contemporary
Macedonia_](https://jonblackwood.net/2016/09/06/critical-art-in-contemporary-
macedonia-2/) (2016) is the first in-depth study of the contemporary
alternative art scene in Macedonia in English.

In his interview with Global Voices, Blackwood explains his quest as an art
researcher and his efforts to connect the different parts of Europe by
challenging stereotypes about the Balkan region:

**Filip Stojanovski (FS): How does the “Western” art world perceive the ex-
Yugoslav or the wider Balkan art world?**

![](https://globalvoices.org/wp-
content/uploads/2018/11/22091781_10159286534655621_128967542_n-268x400.jpg)

Jon Blackwood. Courtesy photo.

**Jon Blackwood (JB):** It’s hard to give a definitive answer to this one. I
don’t really think the old binaries of “West” and “East” are helpful anymore,
for as the Cold War period recedes into history these binaries mean less and
less. Probably a more useful distinction is “the EU” and “the Rest of Europe”.

There are small, very dedicated groups of scholars from Scotland, England,
France, Germany, Austria and North America who are very active in the ex-
Yugoslav region in the field of visual culture. Beyond that, I am afraid there
is still a lot of misunderstanding and ignorance generally.

In terms of the art world, interest has grown a little in the last few years.
I started working intensively on the art history of Yugoslavia, and the post-
Yugoslav contemporary art worlds around 2006 simply because I had been
challenged by what I had seen, and equally baffled by the almost complete lack
of English language material on it. This has begun to shift decisively in the
last decade.

For example, in the last two to three years, the Tate has established a Russia
and Eastern Europe Acquisitions Committee and is beginning to show names like
Braco Dimitrijević from Bosnia-Herzegovina, and Sanja Iveković from Croatia,
regularly in its permanent displays. MOMA’s extraordinary contemporary show of
Yugoslav architecture also shows they are now really paying attention to the
region. There are other players like calvert22 in London, and Nottingham
Contemporary in the East Midlands, that also continue the long-standing, but
rather sporadic UK interest in Yugoslav art which started in the early
twentieth century with the work of [Ivan
Meštrović](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ivan_Me%C5%A1trovi%C4%87).

**FS: What challenges do you face as a researcher who is not actually based in
the Balkans, and needs the information in English?**

******JB:** English language sites like [Global
Voices](https://globalvoices.org), [Meta.mk](http://meta.mk/en/), and
[Balkanist](https://balkanist.net/), as well as independent journalists like
[Vladimir Petreski](https://twitter.com/vpetreski) on Twitter, are critical to
researchers like me in the Balkan region. Only a few international newspapers
offered serious coverage of the political and diplomatic personalities
involved in the protests and political upheavals in Macedonia from 2015 to
2017.

Only in times of extreme crisis, such as the [Kosova
situation](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Kosovo_War) from 1999-2001, are
Macedonian affairs covered seriously. I am also convinced that the
journalistic coverage in our newspapers was because of increased diplomatic
involvement from the US/EU in resolving the political deadlock of 2016 to 2017
and in the focus on the terrible conditions facing many migrant people as they
passed through Macedonia, rather than a serious interest in internal
Macedonian affairs.

**FS: What are the main findings of your research in the ex-Yugoslav space?**

**JB:** I suppose the big surprise for me when I first started working in the
region was how much Yugoslavia still existed _culturally_ at some levels, even
if it was long finished politically and legally. Back in the 2000s, there was
still some sense of a Yugoslav cultural space: People in Skopje were
interested in novels published in Ljubljana and artists in Split and Dubrovnik
were interested in hearing about what was going on in Novi Sad. In 2018, I’m
afraid that this is no longer so much the case.

In Macedonia, as you know, the system for cultural funding and the cultural
infrastructure is largely unchanged from Yugoslav times — just it subsists on
about one-fiftieth of the money that it did before 1991. In the parts of ex-
Yugoslavia still outside the EU, I have the sense that institutions, although
they exist, have (with a few exceptions) ceased long ago to fulfill the
functions they were established for.

The result is that artists have had to establish their own cultural
infrastructures and ecosystems in response to the failure of these
institutions and try to make work in that way. It's also true to say that
Belgrade has a thriving self-organised art scene which subsists on minimal
public funds topped up with grants from bigger international cultural funds
and some embassies.

![](https://globalvoices.org/wp-
content/uploads/2018/11/22095569_10159286919515621_810778227_o-800x530.jpg)

Obsessive Possessive Aggression, ContraContraBeacon, 2016. Copyright the
Artists. OPA used Morse code, with a light mounted on the roof of the Gallery
of Contemporary Art in Skopje, to deliver a subliminal political message
during times of political crisis and deadlock in Macedonia.

**FS: What are top priorities in regard to enabling the development of art in
the region?**

******JB:** The biggest problem I think in the different republics of ex-
Yugoslavia is the loss of an engaged audience. The audience for contemporary
art has been eaten away through the linked processes of conflict,
impoverishment, destruction of working conditions for the working and middles
classes, a marked decline in education standards, economic polarisation,
migration/exile, and the anti-intellectual, ahistorical politics of ethnic
nationalism. When so many citizens have to focus so much of their effort on
just survival, it’s little surprise that people have lost the habit of going
to art galleries or taking an interest in other cultural manifestations such
as theater, dance, or ballet.

In any case, the contemporary artist, wherever she or he is from, is obliged
to be a nomad. High-profile artists always manage to work on projects abroad
whilst remaining rooted in the communities that they grew up in. There are
examples of this from all across the former Yugoslav space and, in this way,
these artists are working in exactly the same way as their counterparts
globally.

However, this is a very small minority of active artists; most either are
obliged to take a non-art job soon after graduating from the Academy and do
their work in what spare time they have or give up altogether due to lack of
opportunity. With a lack of a functioning domestic market, it is more
important than ever that young graduates from the non-EU Western Balkans are
prepared as much as possible for the expectations of differing EU and global
marketplaces and how to access them effectively.

If future governments in the region wish to help grow and encourage younger
artists, then even a small fund enabling them to travel to make a show
internationally or make a short study trip relevant to their practice would be
a huge step forward. Small money spent on an initiative like this could
potentially deliver major results in the years ahead, from young people whose
talents may be lost altogether to art. Cultural tourism is becoming a multi-
million dollar business in Europe but it can never thrive without a healthy
grassroots and cultural infrastructure.

**FS: How has your work been received in the different parts of Europe that
you have been covering?**

******JB:** People like me have to be aware of what a delicate position we are
in, in ex-Yugoslav countries. In my case, initially, I didn’t speak any local
language or know much beyond general information about the territory that I
had decided to enter, and this took time, effort and serious engagement to
overcome. Many are weary of people like me coming to countries like Bosnia,
Serbia, or Macedonia, promising the earth and then disappearing, having done
little more than write another line on the CV. So initially there was a little
suspicion of motivation, and ironic encouragement, I suppose.

Response to work completed has been largely favorable. My work has been based
largely on personal contact and discussion, with archive and library work
where appropriate. My book [_Critical Art in Contemporary
Macedonia_](https://openair.rgu.ac.uk/handle/10059/2280), published in 2016,
has attracted a lot of informal comment, much of it very positive. Of course,
there are always questions about the line-up of artists and curators that one
chooses to work with and talk about, but that’s only to be expected with such
a project.

I suppose the biggest pleasure I have had is in showing work by contemporary
artists from the region in Scotland. I curated a show of contemporary video
art from Macedonia at Gray’s School of Art, where I work now, and then a show
by six Bosnian women video artists in Perth, in 2017.

![](https://globalvoices.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/11/captured_state.jpg)

Jon Blackwood (back row, second from left) with the Macedonian artists who
took part in the exhibition “Captured State” at Summerhall in Edinburgh, in
2017, with Richard Demarco, founder of Summerhall.

In 2018, people’s eyes are very jaded in such a hyper-visual world and artists
and curators have to fight much harder than ever to maintain the audience’s
attention. Introducing the likes of [Igor
Toshevski](https://toshevski.weebly.com/), [OPA](http://www.o-p-a.org/),
[Ephemerki](https://www.facebook.com/ephemerki/), and [Verica
Kovacevska](http://www.kovacevska.net/) to an Edinburgh audience for the first
time was a great experience and it has sharpened people’s interests in the
region, generally.

This was the exhibition [_Captured State_ at Summerhall in
Edinburgh](https://openair.rgu.ac.uk/handle/10059/2423) and I will work with
the same space for another show, this time from Bosnia-Herzegovina, in 2020-
we are just starting on that one now.

[![](https://globalvoices.org/wp-
content/uploads/2018/11/22323330_10159319379190621_1590296397_n-1-300x400.jpg)](https://globalvoices.org/wp-
content/uploads/2018/11/22323330_10159319379190621_1590296397_n-1.jpg)

Jon Blackwood pictured at the Marko Cepenkov Cultural Centre in Prilep, with
Borko Lazeski's re-worked National Liberation Struggle fresco. The fresco was
completed in 1990-91 and is a replica of the work lost at Skopje railway
station during the [tragic earthquake of 26 July
1963](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/1963_Skopje_earthquake).

2019 will be a big year for my work on Macedonian art, I suppose, as a number
of projects I have been working for a while, on will come to fruition. I will
produce an introductory book in English on the work of the legendary
Macedonian modernist and fresco painter Borko Lazeski (1917-1993) who is one
of my artistic heroes from the region. With the help of the Scottish Funding
Council’s Global Challenges Research Fund, I have had two wonderful summers
researching his work and I hope to do that justice in the text I will write,
and to help raise Borko’s profile to the international level his inspiring
drawings, frescoes and paintings deserve.

In the summer of 2019, I will mount an exhibition of three young Macedonian
artists in Aberdeen, as part of a [new exchange programme between Macedonia
and
Scotland](https://www.facebook.com/events/1931283606924853/?active_tab=about).
I hope to offer young curators in Macedonia the opportunity to work with three
young Scottish artists later in the year, in Skopje. I am really excited now
that these projects are at the point of fruition.

