![](https://ar.globalvoices.org/wp-
content/uploads/2018/11/Migrants_in_Hungary_2015_Aug_018-800x450.jpg)

Migrants in Hungary, August 2015. Photo: Gémes Sándor/SzomSzed, Creative
Commons BY-SA 3.0 via Wikimedia.

After the Assad regime [forcibly moved residents of Eastern
Ghouta](https://globalvoices.org/specialcoverage/the-fall-of-syrias-eastern-
ghouta/) to northern cities, some chose to stay within Syria's borders. But
others chose to cross the border into Turkey and start a life far from war,
bombs and death. Of those, some planned to move further, toward cities in the
European Union.

Omar (not his real name) was one of those who chose refuge in Turkey.
Instability, lack of security and the continuous fighting between the
opposition factions, coupled with the lack of work opportunities or
possibilities for higher education, pushed him to make such a decision. The
22-year-old arrived in Idlib, in northwestern Syria among the forcibly
displaced masses from Eastern Ghouta.

Around two months after arriving in Idlib, Omar and a friend decided to seek a
route into Turkey. He consulted with a trafficker who had helped one of Omar's
friends cross into Turkey a few days earlier. The trafficker told him to go to
a district in Syria called Zarzour to negotiate the details and fees.

As they had been instructed, Omar and his friend met the trafficker at the
designated location and the three agreed to cross the Turkish border that
night. The trafficker asked them to wait at a specified house, but he never
showed up. A few hours later, five people arrived at the house and said that
the Gendarmerie (Turkish law enforcement) had caught them and ordered them to
return to Syria. They added that they were part of a bigger group that had
been split into two. The bigger group of eight had gone first and had been
lucky to have crossed the border unnoticed. For this smaller group, it was the
tenth unsuccessful attempt.

According to the story they related, their journey had started in a minivan
that transported them to Adduriyah, an area adjacent to the border wall,
accompanied by a guide, a person who knows the road well and communicates
through a mobile phone with a monitor. The monitor, in turn, monitors the
movement of Turkish forces. The group was warned that the road was rugged and
that they would have to jump over a wall and walk through sewers. The journey
was interrupted by Turkish forces. Three members of that group decided not to
take another chance and stayed in Syria.

The trafficker showed up the following day. He asked Omar and his friend to
each pay $450, the figure Omar had been given beforehand. The trafficker told
them to leave everything behind, including their luggage, as the journey would
be rough. Omar initially refused, but eventually caved in after the others who
had experienced this journey told him that bags become an immense burden while
crossing the border.

The group that set out comprised four young men and two women. They climbed a
hill to the wall along the border. After jumping over, the guide told them to
run non-stop. They had to pull along the women, for whom the exertion soon
became too difficult. The rough road was slick with mud, which made running
more difficult as their feet got stuck in the wet earth. It was also strewn
with thorns and flowing with dirty sewage water. Just as they were on the
verge of crossing the border, the two women could not take it anymore and
began yelling and crying.

The yelling drew the attention of Turkish forces, who arrived on the scene and
fired shots in the air. The guide translated what the Turkish officers said.
The officers took them to a military enclosure with a watchtower, very bright
searchlights and a helicopter landing pad. The sat them down on the pad, along
with another group that had been caught earlier.

A soldier took pictures of each of them with his mobile phone. Their names
were taken and they were kept there until 3 a.m. Every now and then they were
joined by other groups of Syrians who had been caught by the Turkish forces —
men and women, old and young.

At 3 a.m., in the freezing cold, the group boarded buses back to the official
Turkish-Syrian crossing point —a bitter reminder of a time not so long ago
when they had boarded the buses that had forcibly removed them from Eastern
Ghouta to Idlib.

At the crossing point they were transported in minivans back to the
trafficker's house, which was packed with Syrians waiting to escape the
country. There was barely space to sleep. The loud cries of children coupled
with the screams of men and women prevented Omar and his friend from getting
much-needed rest.

The following day at noon, the trafficker told them they were to cross during
the daytime. As they approached the border area once more, they saw Turkish
forces spread all along the border. They flatly refused to attempt the
crossing, and the trafficker then agreed to push the journey back to the
evening.

At 8 p.m., the trafficker returned them to the same place at the border. They
waited in a grove of olive trees, 200 meters from the border, where many other
groups of people were also waiting to make the crossing. The guide went to
scout the route and reported back that they would have to wait — until 5 a.m.
Trouble started brewing among the group, and people started yelling at the
baffled guide, demanding that he take them back. The guide called the
trafficker and told him that the road was not clear, that Turkish forces were
heavily present, and that they were firing shots in the air. They waited there
for one more hour and then returned to the trafficker's house.

Omar and his companions’ morale plummetted. They were tired, as they barely
slept for three long nights. But they were determined to cross the border and
decided to try another trafficker. They got their money back and headed to
Silkin, 30 kilometers away from Zarzour, where they waited for the new
trafficker.

After a while, a young man of only 18 arrived and identified himself as the
trafficker. He took them to his house and explained the escape plan. He said
that the crossing would only take an hour and that the danger zone was no more
than 200 meters. If they could cross this stretch, they would successfully
reach Turkey. The trafficker's family was very hospitable, his mother even
prayed for them. The trafficker charged them $400 each and like the previous
trafficker, told them they could not take any belongings.

It was the first day of the holy month of Ramadan. They washed up and set off
on their journey before sunset. The guide arrived and explained the route.
They were five people, split into two groups. They first had to cross the
Orontes River on a small float made of plastic bottles lashed together and
stuffed into a cloth bag. They waited for the calls for Maghreb prayer as
Turkish soldiers would be busy breaking their fast and eating their Iftar
meal, as the monitor had instructed the guide.

On the other bank spread fields of wheat. The guide led them, crawling along
the ground over mud and thorns for half an hour until they reached asphalt.
Then they sprinted over the 50-meter stretch between the asphalt road and the
mountain. They kept on running as the road continued up the mountain. Half an
hour later, the guide stopped and told them that they had just crossed the
danger zone. They caught their breath and marched their way to a Turkish
village. They took shelter in a safe house, where they would wait for a car to
collect them the next day.

They washed and slept in the safe house. The following day, a Turkish man
arrived and asked their destination — they said Istanbul. He charged them
$200. The five men got into his car. Twenty-six hours later, they arrived at
their final destination.

Omar is now contemplating a plan to get to Europe. Will he risk his life yet
again in search of a better alternative to life in Syria?

