![](https://globalvoices.org/wp-
content/uploads/2017/08/GyaniMaiyaSen-800x446.jpg)

Gyani Maiya Sen is one of the two fluent Kusunda language speakers. Screenshot
from a video by Felix Gaedtke.

A [newly launched
book](http://kathmandupost.ekantipur.com/news/2017-08-01/book-that-traces-
kusunda-tribes-history-hits-shelves.html)-cum dictionary of the Kusunda
language, one of several endangered languages in Nepal, is helping prevent the
language from dying out with a whimper. The origins of the isolated
[language](http://blog.dictionary.com/kusunda/), which bears no obvious
relation to any other spoken language in the world, continues to be a source
of [bafflement to linguists](http://www.arabnews.com/last-
nepal%E2%80%99s-kusunda-speakers-mourns-dying-language).

> पाँच वर्षको प्रयासपछि तयार भयो कुसुण्डा भाषाको शब्दकोष
>
> Gyani Maiya Sen is one of the two fluent Kusunda language speakers.
> Screenshot from a video by Felix Gaedtke.cZv”>https://t.co/OFcXajCcZv
> [pic.twitter.com/g6mt1fOejq](https://t.co/g6mt1fOejq)
>
> — Thaha Khabar (@ThahaKhabar) [July 30,
> 2017](https://twitter.com/ThahaKhabar/status/891565861131083776)

> It took five years of effort to compile the Kusunda dictionary

Though the [2011
Census](http://cbs.gov.np/image/data/2017/Statistical%20Year%20Book%202015.pdf)
shows the population of Kusunda people in Nepal as 273 and indicates 28 people
speaking the Kusunda language as their mother tongue, field studies suggest
there are actually only 150 Kusundas of which only two people are fluent
speakers of the language.

Kusunda language is an oral language without any script and there are no
written records, documents or books available. The living Kusundas dispersed
to different parts of the country and they do not get the opportunity to speak
in their mother tongue. They had to assimilate in ways of life and cultural
practices of the places where they live now. As a result, the Kusundas do not
even speak their mother tongue at home.

According to Uday Raj Aale, the author of the book, the only two fluent
speakers alive are Gyani Maiya Sen Kusunda, 81, from Deukhuri, Dang and Kamala
Sen Khatri, 48, from Rolpa. Currently, Kusundas live in the Kapilvastu,
Arghakhanchi, Pyuthan, Rolpa, Dang, and Surkhet districts of Nepal.

![](https://globalvoices.org/wp-content/uploads/2017/08/Kusunda-Book-
Jacket-800x600.jpg)

Jacket of the book on Kusundas. Used with permission.

The [Kusundas](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Kusunda_people), known as _Ban
Raja_ (kings of the forest), led a nomadic hunter-gatherer lifestyle in the
hill forests of Nepal’s central and mid-western development regions until only
few decades ago. Their lifestyle, patterns of habitation, and the distinct and
unique Kusunda language suggest that they have been living in Nepal since
ancient times.

The Kusundas also refer to themselves as ‘kings of the forest’, albeit in the
Kusunda language, rendered _Gilangdei Myahak_ and claim equal status and
relationship to the [Thakuris](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Thakuri), the
ruling clan in Nepal. According to the Kusundas, the Thakuris are kings of
cultivated land, while they have dominion over [wooded
lands](https://thehimalayantimes.com/nepal/forest-cover-increased-nepal-
late/). Kusundas have typically taken Thakuri surnames such as Shahi, Sen, and
Khan.

The book by Aaley talks about the history, language, culture, and tradition of
the Kusundas and has a collection of more than 2,500 words from the Kusunda
language. However, Aaley is not the only person [studying the
Kusundas](http://www.himalayanlanguages.org/kusunda_genetic_prehistory). Brian
Houghton Hodgson, Johan Reinhard, David Watters, [B.K.
Rana](http://www.people.fas.harvard.edu/~witzel/kusunda.htm) and [Madhav
Prasad Pokharel](http://www.bbc.com/news/world-asia-17537845) are among the
other academics that have worked to shed light on the mysterious language.

This [video](https://vimeo.com/58705459) made by Felix Gaedtke and Gayatri
Parameswaran features interviews with Gyani Maiya Sen, her son and Professor
Pokharel from Tribhuvan University’s Central Department of Linguistics.

This year’s local elections brought some good news for Kusundas. [Dhan Bahadur
Kusunda](http://www.myrepublica.com/news/24067/), founder of the Nepal Kusunda
Development Society, was selected as a representative for the executive
committee for the municipality of Ghorahi, Nepal’s seventh largest city, under
the marginalized community category quota.

While the Kusunda language is still effectively facing extinction, the
representation of Kusundas in local government and efforts like the compiling
of the Kusunda dictionary will help to preserve the Kusunda culture and
tradition as well as the language itself.

