![](https://globalvoices.org/wp-
content/uploads/2018/11/GyaniMaiyaSen-800x450.jpg)

Gyani Maiya Sen Kusunda. Image by author.

For years, people knew very little about the [Kusunda
language](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Kusunda_language) of western and
central Nepal. The 2011 Census conducted by Nepal’s Central Bureau of
Statistics puts the population of
[Kusundas](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Kusunda_people), a forest tribe of
western Nepal, at around 273. To learn more about the language and the culture
of the Kusunda people, Global Voices spoke with [Gyani Maiya
Sen](http://kusunda.linguistics.anu.edu.au/gyanimaiya.php) Kusunda — one of
only two fluent speakers of the dying Kusunda language.

### ‘The kings of the forest’

It was hot and humid, the roads were empty, and not even the battery-powered
[Tuk-Tuk](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Auto_rickshaw) drivers were willing to
offer us a ride. With heavy tripods, cameras and other filming equipment, we
headed to Gyani Maiya Sen’s house in Kulmor village in Nepal’s Dang district.
[Gyani Maiya Sen](http://kusunda.linguistics.anu.edu.au/gyanimaiya.php)
Kusunda, in her early 80s, is one of the only two fluent speakers of the dying
[Kusunda language](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Kusunda_language). The
population of Kusundas is believed to be 273; however, field studies by
researchers have shown only 150 of them dispersed in the Dang, Rolpa, Pyuthan,
Arghakhanchi, and Surkhet districts of Nepal.

Kusundas have settled in villages after their forefathers spent their lives in
jungles and caves as nomadic tribesmen. They would visit the villages only to
beg alms, and many Kusundas still feel embarrassed to reveal their surname as
they are still treated as ‘people from the jungle’. However, nowadays they
have taken [Thakuri](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Thakuri) surnames such as
Shahi, Sen, and Khan — surnames connected with the ruling clan of Nepal.
Kusundas claim themselves to be _ban rajas_ , the kings of the forest.

**Read more:** [Indigenous Nepali Language With Only Two Fluent Speakers Sees
Pages of Hope in Newly Launched
Dictionary](https://globalvoices.org/2017/08/16/indigenous-nepali-language-
with-only-two-fluent-speakers-sees-pages-of-hope-in-newly-launched-
dictionary/)

Kusunda language is an isolated language which means it is not related to any
other languages in the world. Unfortunately, it is also defined by a younger
generation, that has stopped speaking it — leaving the language to slowly fade
out as the older generations pass away. Besides Gyani Maiya, her sister
Kamala, in her early 50s, is another fluent speaker of the language from their
community.

[Uday Raj Aaley](https://www.facebook.com/uday.raj.92167), a researcher
devoted to reviving the Kusunda language, also speaks Kusunda language.
However, Gyani Maiya fears whether her granddaughter Rakshya will ever speak
her mother tongue and keep the tradition alive. When we met Gyani Maiya, she
was busy peeling green mangoes together with her granddaughter. She was
teaching her granddaughter to peel, slice and dry the mangoes for future use
but unfortunately, they were talking in Nepali.

[![](https://globalvoices.org/wp-
content/uploads/2018/11/GyaniMaiyaSenwithhergranddaughter-800x450.jpg)](https://globalvoices.org/wp-
content/uploads/2018/11/GyaniMaiyaSenwithhergranddaughter.jpg)

Gyani Maiya Sen with her granddaughter. Image by author.

### No hooves, only claws

As we started talking to Gyani Maiya and she started telling us about their
culture and tradition, a stray cow entered the barn. She suddenly rose from
her seat, climbed down the ‘ _lisno_ ’ (a wooden log shaped into a ladder),
and shooed away the bovine. When she returned back, she talked to us about
Kusunda food habits. She said, “Kusundas avoid animals with hooves but love
eating ones with claws.” They wouldn’t even touch cattle including goats and
pigs. They would neither kill a deer nor eat venison which shows how they co-
exist with nature.

However, they love eating birds, a pheasant being their favorite. And the
monitor lizard is their preferred hunt. It's so special that it has become a
part of the bridal ceremony, as they need to present its egg, meat, clothes
and of course some money to the would-be bride's family. If they can’t find a
monitor lizard egg, the initial conversation can’t happen between the
interested parties. And no monitor lizard meat means ‘no marriage’ at all.

[![The bag and the snare Image by author.](https://globalvoices.org/wp-
content/uploads/2018/11/TheBagAndTheSnare-800x450.jpg)](https://globalvoices.org/wp-
content/uploads/2018/11/TheBagAndTheSnare.jpg)

The bag and the snare. Image by author.

### Still hunting and gathering

She then unpacked a tangled bulk of cords. The mesh of cords was a snare to
trap jungle fowls and bag meant to carry the trapped birds. Made from cords
extracted from wild creepers, the snare is called ‘ _aant_ ‘ and the bag is
called ‘ _aamji_ ‘ in Kusunda language. The Kusundas tie the snare between two
trees, hide nearby and make sounds like pheasants by putting cycas leaves
between their lips. As the birds pass through the trees, they get trapped and
then they catch and carry those birds in this bag with perforations.

While we were busy documenting the special words of Kusunda language, I could
see a swarm of tiny insects heading to a small hole in a wooden log. Neither
honey bees nor flies, they are called ‘ _putka’_ according to Gyani Maiya and
they yield honey-like sweet substance.

Finally, Gyani Maiya showed us her barn. She had planted yams in every nook
and cranny. With a help of a small spade, she unearthed some of them and put
them in the _aamji_. For a woman of above 80, she was still a strong figure.
And above all, her commanding tone was the evidence of the aura she might have
carried around when she was young — powerful like a ‘queen of the jungle’.

[![](https://globalvoices.org/wp-
content/uploads/2018/11/Putka-800x450.jpg)](https://globalvoices.org/wp-
content/uploads/2018/11/Putka.jpg)

Putka. Image by author.

