![](https://globalvoices.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/10/Katie_Meyler.jpg)

More Than Me's founder, Katie Meyler, in Liberia, September 19, 2016,
Wikimedia Commons, sourced from More Than Me's official Flickr page.

Last week, the US investigative journalism project ProPublica broke a story
titled[ Unprotected](https://features.propublica.org/liberia/unprotected-more-
than-me-katie-meyler-liberia-sexual-exploitation/) about a massive sex abuse
scandal at More Than Me (MTM), a non-governmental organization that primarily
operates schools to support Liberia’s most vulnerable girls in West Point,
Monrovia. The exposé left many wondering how such gross negligence was
possible, but private schools run by NGOs like MTM are [cropping up all over
Africa](https://brightthemag.com/rising-academy-network-paul-skidmore-low-
cost-private-schools-cropping-up-in-the-worlds-poorest-
countries-3865f3929f6b), one altruistic idealist at a time.

Founded in 2008 by Katie Meyler, an American, and Macintosh Johnson, a
Liberian, Meyler’s evangelical-style faith in the MTM mission led her to raise
$8 million from international donors, celebrities and philanthropists. Since
its inception, MTM has scaled up from one to 19 different schools serving over
4,000 students.

Meyler and Johnson lacked experience in education or development, but in
Liberia, where 60 percent of school-age children are out of school, Meyler
cast herself as a savior of sorts who could pick up where Liberia’s decimated
education system left off.

In 2013, Liberian president Ellen Johnson Sirleaf deemed the education system
[“a mess” ](https://www.reuters.com/article/us-liberia-education-
idUSBRE97S0TO20130829)after all 25,000 enrolled high school students failed
state exams. Recovering from civil war and a devasting Ebola crisis, the
Liberian government was desperate for solutions and turned to international
donors and do-gooders for support.

On MTM academy’s opening day, President Sirleaf publicly endorsed Meyler,
stating that what she wanted more than anything for her country was “to expand
Katie Meyler’s initiative to as many communities as possible.”

With few legal restrictions, requirements or obstacles, Meyler established MTM
as a reputable organization by spinning a mesmerizing tale of salvation all
over social media.

#### **Culpability without consequence**

By the end of 2012, however, rumors of allegations of sexual abuse against
Johnson had already begun to circulate within the MTM community. But by that
time, Meyler was soaring through the world of elite philanthropists as a
“charity star,” winning a major $1 million award from JPMorgan Chase and
recognition as [Time Magazine’s Person of the Year](http://time.com/time-
person-of-the-year-ebola-caregivers/) in 2014 for her work with Ebola
response. According to ProPublica, Meyler had suspicions of Johnson’s
proclivity toward young girls as early as 2011, but the pair were in an on-
and-off intimate relationship, and she failed to take quick, decisive action
against him. Others who suspected Johnson hesitated to come forward because
they worried Meyler would choose her boyfriend over the girls, explained MTM
school nurse Iris Martor.

The ProPublica investigation confirms that Johnson raped and abused nearly a
third of the schoolgirls, some as young as 10 years old. MTM staff finally
reported Johnson to the police in 2014, and he was taken into custody with a
subsequent criminal investigation and [several juried court
hearings.](https://www.liberianobserver.com/news/more-than-me-academy-
recruiter-appears-in-court-on-rape-charges/) Meyler continued to communicate
with Johnson while he was in custody, but did not attend his hearings. Johnson
ended up dying of AIDS before his trial resolved. ProPublica confirms that
several of the girls whom Johnson raped also contracted HIV.

MTM denied any wrong-doing except hiring Johnson in the first place. MTM board
members claim that MTM created a “safe environment” with full commitments to
child rights and child protection. Meyler spun herself in the story as yet
[another victim duped by
Johnson](https://www.instagram.com/p/BoxavF8lMXw/?utm_source=ig_web_copy_link)
and commended the girls who came forward, vowing to fight even harder for
their protection. MTM provided scholarships and housing for some of Johnson’s
victims, but others transferred out and at least one returned to a harsh life
on the streets.

#### **White saviors, fragile states**

Today, MTM continues to operate in direct partnership with the Liberian
government. In 2016, the Ministry of Education launched Partnership Schools
for Liberia under the [Liberia Education Advancement
Program](http://moe.gov.lr/partnership-schools-for-liberia/), outsourcing
nearly 100 schools to for-profit and non-profit NGO’s including MTM, Bridge
International Academies (also under[ investigation](http://globalinitiative-
escr.org/wp-content/uploads/2017/07/Civil-society-call-on-investors-to-cease-
support-to-Bridge-International-Academies.pdf) for misleading practices), and
Rising Academies, among others.

Teachers unions in Liberia and abroad, as well as development professionals
who oppose school privatization in Africa, vocally condemned this initiative.
Yet, despite [mixed results in its first
year](https://www.devex.com/news/early-results-did-private-outsourcing-
improve-liberia-s-schools-90943), the government plans to double the number of
outsourced schools by 2019, following a growing trend across the African
continent. One
[study](https://edafricareport.caeruscapital.co/thebusinessofeducationinafricasummary.pdf#page=4)
estimates that one in four children in Africa—66 million children—will attend
privatized schools by 2021.

Of Liberia's seven inaugural partnerships, over half were founded by white
non-Africans, driven by missions fueled by philanthropic altruism rather than
contextualized knowledge. Race, gender and privilege played a major role in
the formation of MTM and organizations like it. As a white American woman,
Meyler received a lot of passes that a black Liberian probably wouldn’t,
former MTM board member Chidegar “Chid” Liberty told ProPublica.

“There was an ignorance of how badly things could go if the right structures
of governance weren’t in place,” says Liberty, a Liberian-American based part-
time in Monrovia.

Meyler’s willful ignorance goes hand in hand with the ‘white savior complex,’
a term referring to white people driven to help non-white people and rooted in
a history of colonialism and racism that perpetuates degrading stereotypes of
“uncivilized” black Africa. Writer Teju Cole calls it the [White Savior
Industrial
Complex](https://www.theatlantic.com/international/archive/2012/03/the-white-
savior-industrial-complex/254843/) — because there's clearly money to be made
by interfering in the lives of others.

Liberty, who left the board in 2015, went on record with ProPublica to say he
believes that the organization “actually played a significant role in a big
institutional crime against these girls.”

“Anywhere else in the world, everybody involved would be in some way held to
account,” Liberty said, suggesting that Meyler and the organization’s white
privilege informed every aspect of MTM’s ethos and actions.

### **Scale up or scale back**

Liberia’s plans to scale up private-public school partnerships are
[unprecedented ](https://www.vox.com/2016/4/8/11347796/liberia-outsourcing-
schools)on the continent. From Bill Gates to Mark Zuckerberg, philanthropists
belonging to what ProPublica calls a “rarefied world of globe-trotting
problem-solvers” circle failing governments with predatory focus. This group
recognizes the expediency of investing in African education, and how easily it
can be disguised as altruism.

Proponents of school privatization insist that private schools simply perform
better than struggling state schools. But as the MTM debacle shows, their
feverish insistence on rapid scale-up—which offers a quick return on their
emotional and financial investments—can lead to human rights violations of
epic proportions.

If nations like Liberia fail to see education as a [universal human
right](https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/aug/31/liberia-
turns-to-private-sector-controversial-overhaul-failing-schools) granted by the
state, their struggle to overhaul their education system will continue to
depend on organizations like MTM to fill the void.

In an October 14 [letter
](https://cdn2.hubspot.net/hubfs/3409632/Article%20Response/Letter%20from%20Katie%20Meyler%20-%20October%2014,%202018.pdf)posted
on the MTM website, Meyler announced that she will be temporarily stepping
down from her role as CEO while the organization conducts its own
investigation of the allegations presented in ProPublica's expose.

Undisputably, horrific crimes were committed on MTM’s school grounds with zero
accountability. Meyler subjected Monrovia’s most vulnerable girls to an
evangelical fantasy of “salvation” that spun terrifyingly out of control and
put them in harm’s way, using all the tropes of “do-gooder” development.

But anyone who spends time in Africa knows someone like Meyler, and maybe even
recognizes her idealism in their own projects. Despite vocal criticism, the
[173 billion dollar voluntourism
industry](https://www.thriveglobal.com/stories/14852-annual-173-billion-worth-
of-volunteer-tourism-industry-is-enough-to-make-a-change) is on the rise on
the continent, offering [young
idealists](https://theconversation.com/volunteer-tourism-whats-wrong-with-it-
and-how-it-can-be-changed-86701) the freedom to live out their savior
fantasies at the expense of vulnerable communities. From
[Instagram](https://psmag.com/economics/instagrammingafrica-narcissism-global-
voluntourism-83838) to TED talks, there’s a global choir ready for the next
sermon.

A potent mix of privilege and incompetence often leads to major mistakes. I've
made a few of my own and I know friends, colleagues, and former students have
also fumbled through the complexities of development projects for which they
lacked experience or knowledge. Real development takes time—there are no quick
fixes.

Not every project derails as badly as MTM did, and not every white person
working in Africa is reckless. Competence, of course, cuts across race, class,
and gender. But Meyler's story signals an urgent wake-up call for structure,
solidarity, accountability and integrity when it comes to development—if we're
meant to keep working this way at all.

