![](https://globalvoices.org/wp-
content/uploads/2018/04/Andrei_Rublev_Easter-800x498.jpg)

Two Easter-themed works by Andrei Rublev and Daniil: [Harrowing of Hell and
](https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Harrowing_of_hell_from_Vasilyevskiy_chin_\(1408,_Tretyakov_gallery\).jpg)[Ascension](https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Ascension_from_Vasilyevskiy_chin_\(15th_c.,_GTG\).jpg)
(1408-10), from [State Tretyakov
Gallery](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tretyakov_Gallery) in Moscow. Public
Domain photos via Wikipedia.

Communist rule was not always detrimental to art related to the Orthodox
Christian religion, as attested by three examples of masterpieces that have
found new life on the Internet.

A common misconception in the West is that in the countries ruled by Communist
parties in the second half of the 20th century, the regimes enforced atheism
on the whole population. The actual situation was much more complex; in
practice, Communist authorities were not always opposed to religious
institutions as long as they didn't challenge the dominance of the ruling
party.

For example, while they promoted secularism and nationalized the properties of
the church, Communist parties in Europe usually demanded atheism only from
party members, who in turn obtained access to privileges and opportunities to
become part of the ruling elite.

One of the programs of the [Soviet
Union](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Soviet_Union) was to establish state
atheism since it viewed the religious institution as an integral element of
the Russian Empire it replaced. But in 1941, Soviet leader Stalin stopped the
[anti-religious crackdown](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/USSR_anti-
religious_campaign_\(1928%E2%80%931941\)) which started in 1926 in order to
enlist the support of the Russian Orthodox Church as an ally to arouse Russian
patriotism against Nazi aggression. This led to the revival of Russian
Orthodox religious life and the influence of the church.

After the Second World War, most Central and Eastern European Communist
regimes steered the national Orthodox churches into a docile state, often
infiltrating the hierarchy with secret service agents. Such regimes also
cultivated a milder form of nationalism, which included recognition of the
historical role of the church in the nation-building process.

(One exception was [Albania under totalitarian dictator Enver
Hoxha](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Religion_in_Albania#Communist_Albania)
(1946–1992), who led a violent campaign to eliminate religious life by closing
down all places of worship to create “the first atheist nation in the world.”)

#### Re-purposing religious art and building upon its foundations

Religious art with high aesthetic value was also sort-of-nationalized, i.e.
declared national treasure and managed by the state. This included turning
churches and mosques into museums and re-interpreting religious music as part
of the classical cultural heritage.

For instance, this [1986
recording](https://www.allmusic.com/album/tchaikovsky-liturgy-of-st-john-
chrysostom-mw0001581508) of Tchaikovsky's Hymn of the Cherubim by the USSR
Ministry Of Culture Chamber Choir (active from 1971 to 1991) has attracted
over three million views on
[YouTube](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=SZQzW_QfPew) and has been widely
shared ahead of this year's Orthodox Easter.

But more than any other form of artistic achievements made in religious
context, the church architecture and visual arts were better regarded as
examples of patriotic pride by most Communist regimes.

This inspired the creation of new works of art like the cinematic masterpiece
[_Andrei Rublev_](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Andrei_Rublev_\(film\))
(Russian: Андрей Рублёв). This 1966 historical drama
[film](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=CbguowlkZ4g) was directed by Andrei
Tarkovsky and co-written with Andrei Konchalovsky, and is loosely based on the
life of [Andrei Rublev](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Andrei_Rublev), the
15th-century Russian icon painter.

Besides the life of the painter, the film deals with the issues of ruling
class corruption and treason, contrasting it with the resilience of the common
people in the event of a foreign invasion. It was subjected to censorship
allegedly due to its graphic description of violence, including cruelty to
animals and actual killing of horses on camera. While it won international
awards, Soviet authorities delayed its release within the country for several
years. [Tarkovsky
claimed](https://web.archive.org/web/20180409174210/https://web.archive.org/web/20180409174210/http://people.ucalgary.ca/~tstronds/nostalghia.com/TheTopics/On_Rublov.html)
that in the end his final cut was based on his own decisions, reducing overly
long scenes “with no significance” to shorten its length to 3 hours and 15
minutes.

In 2011, the Russian studio Mosfilm uploaded it as part of [a collection of
free classical films on YouTube](https://globalvoices.org/2018/02/24/all-of-
the-soviet-unions-academy-award-winning-films-are-legally-and-freely-
available-online/).

Tarkovsky's film is available on YouTube in two parts, with subtitles in
English, French, German, Italian, Portuguese, Spanish and Turkish:

  * [Andrei Rublev, part 1](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=x6kqlveBhVY)
  * [Andrei Rublev, part 2](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=4JpnrdEOAcM)

The third example involves a mashup of the traditional with the new. The 1971
animated film _[The Bloody Battle of
Kerzhenets](https://www.animator.ru/db/?ver=eng&p=show_film&fid=2557&sp=1)_
(Russian: Се́ча при Ке́рженце) directed by Ivan Ivanov-Vano and Yuriy
Norshteyn was set to music by [Nikolai Rimsky-
Korsakov](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Nikolai_Rimsky-Korsakov) and it used
Russian frescoes and paintings from the 14th to 16th centuries. These images
from the church walls are animated using two-dimensional stop motion
animation.

The film also reflected the patriotic theme of surviving and overcoming
foreign invasion (from the
[Pechenegs](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pechenegs) to
[Napoleon](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/War_and_Peace_\(film_series\)) to
Hitler). In this case it refers to [the invasion of the Mongols-
Tartars](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mongol_invasion_of_Rus%27) in the 13th
century (who then ruled for 300 years), and the legend of [City of
Kitezh](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Kitezh) which mysteriously hid under
water after the slaughter of the army.

In the film, religious imagery is used to inspire patriotic feelings. For
example, the Virgin Mary with Baby Jesus appears side by side with Russian
defenders. In 1971 and 1972 this animation won several awards at festivals,
mainly in Central and Eastern Europe.

#### Historical patterns worth exploring

The misconception that religion was absolutely banned under Communist rule was
not limited in the West. After the collapse of Communism in the late 1980s,
this notion became part of the right-leaning mainstream narratives in most
post-communist countries. Rising political influence of clericalism in these
societies made the rumored collusion of state and religious institutions
during the previous system a taboo topic for most historians and journalists.

Communist regimes indeed promoted an ideology that suppressed the freedom of
religion in varying degrees, but their implementation lacked consistency. The
actual practice was based on rational calculations whether it helps them stay
in power. Populists today who undermine democracy across the world use a
similar approach although many do not focus on promoting the artistic
achievements of the church.

Instead of highlighting a black and white picture of ‘oppression vs
martyrdom’, it is crucial to examine the complex relationship between the
communist state and the church to better understand the mechanisms of
authoritarianism.

