[![](https://globalvoices.org/wp-
content/uploads/2018/08/unarmed-800x600.jpg)](https://www.facebook.com/UGATLAHI/photos/pcb.10156603864072556/10156603860602556/?type=3&theater)

This sketch features the shooting of an unarmed teenager by a person depicted
as a pig. It reflects the extrajudicial killing of thousands of individuals,
including teenagers, by masked individuals who are allegedly linked to the
police and other state forces. Source: UGATLahi Artist Collective, used with
permission

A group of Filipino high school students has reacted to the Philippines’
deteriorating human rights situation through the creation of powerful visual
imagery.

The students attend Batasan Hills National High School (BHNHS), located in
Batasan Hills, Quezon City, an urban poor community considered to be one of
the bloodiest corners of President Rodrigo Duterte’s notorious campaign “Oplan
Tokhang” (Tagalog for “war against drugs”).

The death toll in Duterte's anti-drug war reached
[20,000](http://newsinfo.inquirer.net/988352/pnp-admits-4251-killed-in-war-on-
drugs) according to a December 2017 government report on the campaign's
perceived success. Yet, they later retracted this number for a more
conservative official figure of over 4,251 casualties as of April 2018.

Critics of Oplan Tokhang accuse Duterte's government of allowing state forces
to arrest and kill drug suspects with impunity.

Batasan Hills has [borne the
brunt](https://www.reuters.com/investigates/special-report/philippines-drugs-
squad/) of Duterte’s bloody war on drugs with officers from the Batasan
Station killing 108 individuals in anti-drug operations between July 2016 and
June 2017, accounting for 39 percent of all killings in Quezon City during
this period.

The students attended an art
[workshop](https://www.facebook.com/SiningBugkos/videos/510235626070654/)
organized by the activist group Sining Bugkos on August 28, 2018, with the aim
of promoting a progressive and pro-people culture that raises the awareness of
youth's rights to a peaceful future. The workshop is part of an art caravan
themed Kultura Karapatan Kapayapaan (Culture, Rights, Peace).

Attended by 190 students, the workshop featured sessions on visual art,
theatre, music, spoken word poetry, photography, and dancing.

[Max Santiago](https://www.facebook.com/maxipogi2004/posts/10156200410374331),
one of the workshop organizers and a member of the [UGATLahi Artist
Collective](https://globalvoices.org/2017/12/29/from-political-icon-to-tyrant-
president-duterte-according-to-philippine-protest-effigies/) who participated
in the workshop said:

> Aware ang kabataan sa mga nangyayari sa lipunan. Makikita sa mga larawan ang
> EJK, Charter change,digmaan at ang agwat sa pagitan ng mahirap at mayaman sa
> lipunan.

> The youth are aware of what's happening in society. On the images you can
> see extrajudicial killings, charter change, war, and the gap between the
> poor and rich in society.

Here are some of the digital images made by the students and shared by the
UgatLahi Artist Collective:

[![](https://globalvoices.org/wp-
content/uploads/2018/08/ejk.jpg)](https://www.facebook.com/UGATLAHI/photos/pcb.10156598869102556/10156598866752556/?type=3&theater)

This digital image calls for an end to drug-related extrajudicial killings. It
collates images of some of the Oplan Tokhang operations in urban poor
communities. Source: UGATLahi Artist Collective, used with permission.

[![](https://globalvoices.org/wp-
content/uploads/2018/08/justice.jpg)](https://www.facebook.com/UGATLAHI/photos/pcb.10156598876922556/10156598874837556/?type=3&theater)

This digital image depicts the killing of students and young people in the so-
called ‘war on drugs’, and the public protests it generated. Source: UGATLahi
Artist Collective, used with permission.

[![](https://globalvoices.org/wp-
content/uploads/2018/08/poor.jpg)](https://www.facebook.com/UGATLAHI/photos/pcb.10156598876922556/10156598875057556/?type=3&theater)

This digital image is headlined with the word ‘karapatan’ (right) and
illustrates the eviction of poor families in many communities targeted by the
government for commercial development. Source: UGATLahi Artist Collective,
used with permission.

[![](https://globalvoices.org/wp-
content/uploads/2018/08/financial.jpg)](https://www.facebook.com/UGATLAHI/photos/pcb.10156598869102556/10156598866602556/?type=3&theater)

This digital image reflects the struggle of many students whose dream of
finishing a degree is made difficult because of poverty. Source: UGATLahi
Artist Collective, used with permission.

