[![](https://globalvoices.org/wp-
content/uploads/2018/08/35523491_238663223392298_2981591993672531968_n.jpg)](https://www.facebook.com/headachestencil/)

Headache Stencil posing in front of a portrait of Thailand's prime minister
shaped in a maneki-neko cat. Source: Headache Stencil, used with permission.

Through street graffiti and murals, the masked artist Headache Stencil has
been [depicting](https://www.theonlinecitizen.com/2018/08/07/meet-thailands-
self-proclaimed-graffiti-terrorist-headache-stencil/) Thailand's ongoing
clamor for democracy and reforms.

When the military [grabbed
power](https://globalvoices.org/specialcoverage/2017-special-
coverage/thailands-three-turbulent-years-under-junta-rule/) in May 2014 and
subsequently drafted a new constitution reinforcing a military-backed
government, they vowed to restore elections and civilian rule, but this has
yet to be realized.

Headache Stencil started making graffiti after the 2014 coup. In an
[interview](http://artwhorecult.com/art-talk-headache-stencil-artist-and-
owner-of-street-of-the-third-world/) with Art Whore, a website documenting
underground pop art, he explains how he got started:

> [I] really do ‘art’ on the day military made coup in Thailand. Really angry
> of soldier on that day. Then go out to make graffiti.

In another interview with Hong Kong-based newspaper South China Morning Post,
he explained why he [chose](https://www.scmp.com/culture/arts-
entertainment/article/2144526/thai-street-artists-send-political-messages-
against) the name ‘Headache Stencil’:

> I’ve called myself Headache for a reason, bro…I want to give some [powerful]
> people a headache.
>
> If people see my work and start noticing that things aren’t fair, I’ve
> achieved my aim.

He believes Thai artists have a
[duty](http://www.nationmultimedia.com/detail/politics/30349018) to reflect
the deterioration of life under Junta [military] rule. In an interview with
The Nation, Thailand’s major English-language daily, Headache Stencil said:

> My art reflects dictatorship, corruption and the loss of freedom in our
> society. It’s the artist’s most important role to mirror society’s illnesses
> and tell the world what Thailand is now facing under military junta rulers.

Early this year, he said he was
[hunted](https://globalvoices.org/2018/02/09/from-street-murals-to-wewalk-
thais-protest-against-corruption-and-call-for-restoration-of-democracy/) by
the police for his graffiti mocking the country’s deputy prime minister who
was exposed of possessing more than a dozen Rolex watches:

[![](https://globalvoices.org/wp-
content/uploads/2018/08/prawit.jpg)](https://www.facebook.com/headachestencil/)

Headache Stencil used the familiar icon of the alarm clock to contrast it with
the luxury watches of the deputy prime minister. It also symbolizes the
extended time of the army as head of the government and the necessity to be
‘alarmed’ with the situation by ending the dictatorship. Source: Headache
Stencil, used with permission.

His ‘Black Panther’ graffiti trended in the news after authorities whitewashed
it. The graffiti refers to a report about a prominent tycoon who was
[caught](http://englishnews.thaipbs.or.th/italian-thai-boss-premchai-
karnasuta-arrested-for-hunting-black-panther/) poaching wild animals,
including a black panther. Headache Stencil drew a panther on a wall and a
mute button symbolizing the concern of many that the case will be eventually
disregarded by the government:

[![](https://globalvoices.org/wp-
content/uploads/2018/08/35459579_2261507773875820_4763400476823650304_n-600x600.jpg)](https://www.facebook.com/headachestencil/)

‘Black Panther’ by Headache Stencil, used with permission.

Below are some of Headache Stencil’s street artworks highlighting the
prolonged military rule and the repeated cancellation of open elections:

[![](https://globalvoices.org/wp-
content/uploads/2018/08/33136837_1956578734652400_8770543193771999232_n-600x600.jpg)](https://www.facebook.com/headachestencil/)

“Fourth year of Thai Military rule. Where is democracy? We miss you.” Image
and caption by Headache Stencil, used with permission.

[![](https://globalvoices.org/wp-
content/uploads/2018/08/38685952_998326913672236_4438790696882667520_n-480x600.jpg)](https://www.facebook.com/headachestencil/)

“How long u will be government huh? Wanna postpone the election again????
Please… this is too long.” Image and caption by Headache Stencil, used with
permission.

Headache Stencil created this poster below after the government
[banned](http://www.khaosodenglish.com/politics/2018/06/25/prayuths-time-
moment-deemed-inappropriate-for-thailand/) the distribution of a Time magazine
edition which featured the story of former army leader and the incumbent Prime
Minister Prayut Chan-o-cha:

[![](https://globalvoices.org/wp-
content/uploads/2018/08/35617193_224388098376067_2248950742834479104_n-600x600.jpg)](https://www.facebook.com/headachestencil/)

Image by Headache Stencil, used with permission.

In this recent [video](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=IWXb4HeyndI) interview
with Singapore-based news website The Online Citizen, Headache Stencil digs
deeper into the challenges and motives of working as a political artist and
activist:

