![](https://globalvoices.org/wp-content/uploads/2017/06/Fairy-02.jpg)

Iranian fine art photographer Mehrdad Naragahi's photography is the visual
embodiment of Gabriel García Márquez ‘s magical realism. “We can be anywhere
in our dreams.” Photo untitled from “The Fairyland” series. Provided by
Naraghi through his [website](http://mehrdadnaraghi.com) and used with
permission.

With millions posting photos online every day, some people believe that
professional photography is in jeopardy. Iranian fine art photographer
[Mehrdad Naraghi](http://mehrdadnaraghi.com/) is not one of them.

“The simplification of photography provides more chances for artists to use
the medium to express themselves,” says Naraghi, whose project, “Japanese
Gardens,” won Paris’ Musée du Quai Branly’s 2014 PHOTOQUAI Residencies Award.

But the ubiquitousness of digital technology does carry some dangers, notes
Naraghi. “If a photographer is preoccupied with technique more than an
internal search and a meaningful way to express him or herself, things become
difficult,” Naraghi, who was born and raised in Tehran, told me in a recent
interview in New York City.

[![](https://globalvoices.org/wp-content/uploads/2017/06/C-P-01.jpg)](From )

From Naraghi's “The City” series. Shot of Tehran in 2014, his hometown.
Naraghi describes it as such: My city is one ravaged by the storms, an
unrecognizable city, with undefined inhabitants concealed within its greyness.
Dazed and confused, with gaping mouths and struggling to breathe. Unscorned
but for a smile at another’s misery. Neither breaths sighed return to be
breathed nor are desires fulfilled; greyness overwhelms. My city is the
endless rule of grey. Photos from Naraghi's
[website](http://mehrdadnaraghi.com) and used with permission.

With his blurring of geographical markers and dreamlike imagery, Naragahi's
photography is the visual embodiment of Gabriel García Márquez ‘s magical
realism. “We can be anywhere in our dreams,” he says.

Naraghi’s quiet, opaque images, often seen only through slivers of light,
demand the viewer’s attention. The quick visual impact commonly expected of
Western art is nowhere in his work, which invites the viewer to explore and
wander slowly.

Naraghi’s photos have been exhibited in China, France, Iran, the Netherlands,
the UAE, the US and the UK, and published in prominent art magazines and
books, including Different Sames: New Perspectives in Iranian Contemporary
Art, Connaissance des Arts (No 21) and La Photographie Iranienne, (Un regard
Sur la Creation Contemporaine en Iran).

Excerpts from the interview follow:

**One of the characteristics of your photos is their blurred geographical
traces, to the point where it is unclear in which city or country the
photographs were taken. Once geographical identifiers are lost, viewers face a
global space. What should the viewer be looking for in this space?**

The atmosphere of my work is dreamlike, and we don’t have any borders in
dreams—we can be anywhere in our dreams. In order to create this atmosphere, I
avoid using elements that have specific geographic markers.

![](https://globalvoices.org/wp-
content/uploads/2017/06/IMG_0068-e1496852648907.jpg)

Naraghi captures a silhouette in a indistinguishable New York. Photo from his
[Instagram](https://www.instagram.com/mehr.naraghi/) feed.

Just as people outside Iran cannot tell my nationality only from my
appearance, this is also true about my art. We live at a time when our
differences are no longer as visible on the surface, but found in deeper
layers, layers that are formed from history, collective memory and the
political conditions of our individual geographies.

**Your photographs have been exhibited in China, the Netherlands, Iran, the
United Arab Emirates and France, and you are in the U.S. now. What differences
have you observed in the way different audiences view your work?**

I work in a realm that is shared by all human beings. In this respect, my work
is similar to that of Andrei Tarkovsky, whose films depict a Russian location
but have global audience; or Hayo Miyasaki, whose animations reflect Japan but
have followers all over the world.

Perhaps the only border that can be defined is between Eastern and Western
audiences. Subjects that are not based on rationalism or logic but instead
rely more on intuition are more easily accepted by Eastern audiences, who have
a different sensibility that allows time for study and reflection. Of course,
this is a generalization—it is not possible to separate the two audiences with
certainty. The only thing I can say with certainty is that audiences who are
not dreamers relate less to my work.

I have also come to realize that as an artist from the Middle East, an artist
who carries with him the memory of revolution and war, I feel closer to pain
and am drawn to artwork that reflects this pain. This is something shared by
many Iranian artists. Recently, after attending a Roger Waters concert in New
York (he is a legend in Iran!), I realized that Iranians relate to his music
on such a deep level because the issues he addresses, such as dictatorship,
war and resistance, are a part of our daily lives, not an abstract or
historical memory.

[![](https://globalvoices.org/wp-content/uploads/2017/06/C-P-07.jpg)](hi capt)

Naraghi captures an indistinguishable photo of Tehran's skyline under smog.
From his “The City” collection. Photos from Naraghi's
[website](http://mehrdadnaraghi.com) and used with permission.

In a recent visit to the San Francisco Museum of Modern Art, I viewed works by
Andy Warhol and Anselm Kiefer, and my identification with political upheaval
was reinforced. I saw that as much as Warhol’s pop art is foreign to me, the
pain and destruction in Kiefer’s works is familiar to me.

**In the Fairyland collection we encounter a labyrinth-like atmosphere.
Although the photos are of accessible subjects, the lines, colors, and objects
do not allow the audience to move easily between the pieces. The viewer needs
to linger and search for other layers. This is complex simplicity, like
Japanese Haiku or Hafez poetry. Each time we approach it, we experience the
piece differently. What kind of professional or artistic experiences led to
this collection?**

This collection (and my other collections) were not developed with a pre-
defined plan. I see myself more as a member of my audience, than as a creator.
When I am faced with questions about my work it often takes a long time before
I find answers, and even then, they are tentative answers! In effect, I review
my own works just as I would other artists’ works, and I ponder them. I can
only say that in the formation of this collection, the secretive aspect of
nature, as well as the collective depression of Iranians, played roles.

[![](https://globalvoices.org/wp-content/uploads/2017/06/Fairy-10.jpg)](One of
)

One of Naraghi's pieces from “The Fairyland” collection. Photos from Naraghi's
[website](http://mehrdadnaraghi.com) and used with permission.

In Zen teaching, it is said that “the sound of one hand clapping” exists.
According to this teaching, the sound exists in the atmosphere and through
clapping we only hear it. I believe that more than creating an art piece, the
artist is just a transmitter, like a radio that makes the waves audible, but
does not produce the sounds we hear.

**In several of your photographic series there are very few humans present.
Why is that?**

I believe that the presence of humans—their clothing, facial expressions and
even the way they stand, can completely affect and dominate the frame and
dictate a direction to the audience which distances the work from the
atmosphere I have in mind.

I also feel that when people get in front of a camera, they often start acting
and become unnatural, and consequently the work becomes unnatural and
cheapened, too. This problem pops up more in cinema and stage photography (a
field which is of interest to many Iranian photographers these days). Film
directors either use professional actors who are able to act naturally in
front of a camera, or, like Abbas Kiarostami, obtain excellent acting out of
non-actors.

Photographers such as Sally Mann or Emmet Gowin tend to photograph individuals
who are very close to them, individuals who don’t feel like strangers around
the camera; or, like Jeff Wall, they photograph arranged stagings in such a
way that they appear natural, and both of these are very difficult to manage.
Very few photographers have explored different things in this area.

As I am interested in the work of painters, I follow and photograph the
subjects used in paintings, such as nature. Nevertheless I hope to work on
humans and figures too someday, although it will be a difficult challenge.

**In all five collections available on
your[website](http://mehrdadnaraghi.com/) (Work, Home, Fairyland, Japanese
Gardens and City), the imagery is reminiscent of the supernatural literary
style ofmn writers such as Gabriel García Márquez, or the poetry of German
writer Hermann. How much has your photography been influenced by prose writing
and poetry?**

Poetry, fiction, cinema and music that disconnects us from the world of
reality even for a few moments have entirely affected and continue to affect
my work. For me, poetry holds a special place. As an Iranian, I feel closer to
the realm of poetry, as this is a distinctive aspect of Iranian culture, and
one which runs through our daily lives.

When I talk about my interest in dreamlike spaces in art or literature, I am
not talking about entirely imaginative and fantasy spaces, such as what we see
in Harry Potter stories. Rather, I am talking about building a channel between
reality and dreams, like in Haruki Murakami’s works, where the real and unreal
worlds run in parallel, and meet at some points, but the reader does not
recognize whether the events are unfolding in reality or in the imagination.
It’s a pendulum-like motion between reality and imagination.

**What limitations have you experienced in expressing yourself through
photography? Have you ever been in a situation where you put your camera aside
because you thought it could not do justice to the situation?**

Photography is the most limited artistic medium for creating dream-like
environments. As a painter or sculptor, you can create a piece 100% based on
your imagination. But photography is based on reality; it documents, and you
can never photograph “nothing”! On the other hand, this characteristic makes
photography very interesting to me—putting the audience in limbo between
reality and dream. Looking at my works, the audience knows that because these
are photographs this space must have existed in real life, but due to lighting
and color conditions, they don’t see anything reflective of reality in them.
The audience is put in a position where the line between reality and dream is
minimized.

**To what extent are photography and the camera a means, and to what extent an
end? Is it possible that someday you might choose forms of artistic expression
other than photography?**

The camera and photography are only a medium of expression for me. Due to my
deep interest in paintings, I have always created photographs with a painterly
quality, and this method is in contradiction with the realistic nature of
photography. I also use photographic errors—some intentional, others not—to
create the imagery and evoke the effects I am seeking.

Any form of artistic expression brings its own limitations, which are in
contrast with the imagination’s lack of borders. An artist who possesses
different skills can constantly create new artistic works and be freed from
repetition. As Abbas Kiarostami said in an interview, “I never think about
what my next film would be, because if an idea is suitable for the medium of
cinema, I would make a film. Otherwise, I would either paint, photograph, or
write poetry.”

In recent years, I have started experimenting with poetry, painting and film,
and I hope I will be able to present works in these areas in the coming years.

**New York is a seductive city for a photographer. Do you have any photography
projects focused on New York? Have your experiences with the city and your
relationships with its people and other photographers influenced your work?**

New York has a unique character. My work here has become closer to documentary
photography. New York is a city where reality has a solid presence and this
constricts the atmosphere for poetic thinking and dreaming. The hardships of
living in New York may be one of the reasons one is constantly faced with
reality in this city and not allowed to daydream too much. I have only lived
in this city for six months, but I hope to stay longer to develop a deeper
experience with it. I publish my experiences with New York through daily
postings of photographs and videos on my Instagram page.

[![](https://globalvoices.org/wp-content/uploads/2017/06/IMG_9232.jpg)](Fro)

From Mehrdad Naraghi's [Instagram](https://www.instagram.com/mehr.naraghi/)
feed.

**At a time when so many people have a high-quality cameras on their cell
phones, and considering the democratization of photography and the existence
of hundreds of millions of photographers, where do you see the role and**
**place of fine art photography?**

While the space has become more difficult and restricted for photographers,
for many artists who use photography as their medium this has also made things
easier. An artist always uses artistic media for expressing his personal
views, and for this reason the simplification of photography provides more
chances for artists to use the medium to express themselves. Conversely, if a
photographer is preoccupied with technique and the medium of photography more
than an internal search and a meaningful way to express him or herself, things
become difficult.

In the past, the difficult part of photography lay in the utilization of a
camera; now the difficult part has shifted to the editing and selection of
photographs. With digital capabilities, you can have tens of frames from each
scene, and with software capabilities you can make hundreds of changes to each
frame. Under these circumstances, if the photographer does not know what he or
she wants or is trying to express, they will be lost in a labyrinth of images.

![](https://globalvoices.org/wp-content/uploads/2017/06/IMG_2046.jpg)

Naraghi captures New York. From his
[Instagram](https://www.instagram.com/mehr.naraghi/).

This is not only limited to photography. It is now possible to make a
cinematic film with a cell phone. With the reduction in the prices of 3D
printers, it is also now easy to create sculptures. This happened to graphic
designers years ago, when Photoshop brought graphic design tools to the
masses. At the time, many graphic designers resisted computer graphics. But
technological advancements create restrictions only for individuals who rely
solely on technique for their creations. Some may believe the time for certain
media such as photography or painting has ended, but this is true only for
artists who have nothing else to say. No medium is ever “finished.” It is only
an artist who can be finished.

