![](https://globalvoices.org/wp-
content/uploads/2018/07/35634715_10156261152523617_7344358337737129984_n-800x491.png)

All images used with permission of [Darya
Sazanovich](https://sheeborshee.com/) and [UyatEmes.kz](https://uyatemes.kz/).

As the _agai_ entered the classroom full of 11th grade boys, he was no doubt
pondering how he would execute the difficult task handed to him by the school
principal.

This _agai_ —as male teachers are addressed by students in Kazakhstan's
Kazakh-language schools—was a physical education teacher, standing in for the
principal in the “valeology”, or “health” class she usually taught.

The task assigned to him was to have a conversation with 16- and 17-year old
male students about staying “safe” in their relationships with girls. None of
his prior training had prepared him for this.

“ _Abai bolyndar_!” the _aga_ i began—which means “be careful” in Kazakh.

The unspecific instruction was met with a chorus of embarrassed giggles that
somehow dissipated into a discussion of the football game most of the class
had watched the night before. Talking about football felt more comfortable for
both the students and the _agai,_ so he swiftly abandoned his mission.

This was my cousin's first and last experience of sexual education in the
school from which he graduated last year, located in a prosperous industrial
city in northeastern Kazakhstan. Sex is considered an inappropriate topic for
classrooms in this former Soviet Muslim-majority country.

Nevertheless, according to a nationwide study conducted by the UN office for
Population Activities (UNFPA), “64.6 percent of 15-19-year-olds have their
first sex in school years, and 13.6 percent – before they turn 15.” In a
country of 18 million, local [news
sources](http://openasia.tilda.ws/page1982158.html) regularly cite figures of
6,000 to 10,000 births by teenage girls annually, a figure that does not
include births not registered with the state, nor take into account
pregnancies terminated by legal and illegal abortions.

#### **More than just shame**

Even though pre-marital sex is not uncommon in Kazakhstan, it is deeply
stigmatised. As a result, the consequences of unwanted pregnancies can be
disastrous. There are frequent reports of new mothers abandoning newborn
babies on [roadsides](http://www.zakon.kz/video/v/91885.html) in [trash
bins](http://www.time.kz/news/video/2018/01/30/novorozhdennogo-nashli-v-
musornom-bake-v-pavlodare-video) or in [highway
toilets](http://today.kz/news/proisshestviya/2016-01-08/706840-mladentsa-
nashli-na-dne-vyigrebnoj-yamyi-v-zhambyilskoj-oblasti/). Many of these babies
are born without medical assistance, as minors can only access medical
services legally when accompanied by a parent.

[Our own research](https://www.soros.kz/ru/research_about_sexual_education/)
found that _uyat_ , a Kazakh word that describes a deeply felt shame, is among
the key reasons sexual health literacy is so lacking across the country. It is
_uyat_ for parents to talk about sex and contraception with their children.
But the majority of parents don’t want these conversations to happen at school
either, because they think it is too early for their children to receive this
information. If sexual education is broached at all inside the school walls,
it is the responsibility of teachers like my cousin's _agai,_ who want nothing
to do with it.

![](https://globalvoices.org/wp-
content/uploads/2018/08/illustartion2-800x492.png)

Kazakh and Russian are the main two languages spoken in Kazakhstan, and while
social conservatism is common across the country, it is strongest in Kazakh-
speaking communities.

When asked the question, “Who should provide sexual education for youth?” a
majority of the 15-30-year-old Kazakh-speaking respondents I
[surveyed](http://centralasiaprogram.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/01/Kabatova-
CAP-Fellows-Paper-January-2018.pdf) as part of our research cited their
parents. Most Russian-speaking respondents, on the other hand, said it was the
responsibility of schools. Only one Kazakh-speaking respondent and seven
respondents from the Russian-speaking group out of a pool of 57 acknowledged
ever having had a “sex talk” with one of their parents.

While young people often agree over the need to learn more about sexual and
reproductive health, the taboo surrounding the topic makes them ashamed of
asking questions.

#### **Rise of the _uyatmen_**

_Uyat_ is a [broad concept](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=-EsRN2hhRzs) that
informally regulates the lives of Kazakhstan’s citizens.

Lately it has been in the public spotlight in its capacity as an instrument
used by men to humiliate women, whom they shame publicly for not complying
with conventional societal ideas of how Kazakh women and girls should look,
dress and behave, or even whom they should date or marry.

One famous Kazakh cartoonist came up with a term for such men—[
_uyatmen_](https://www.nur.kz/1114846-v-kazakhstane-poyavilsya-supergeroy-
uyat.html). _Uyatmen_ often use violence and intimidation tactics to compel
others to follow their example. Last March a man who named himself “moral
police” took to the streets of Almaty, Kazakhstan’s largest city, and beat
ethnic Kazakh prostitutes with a [whip](https://www.nur.kz/1723211-skandalnyj-
reper-pobil-kamcoj-ulicnyh-prostitutok-v-almaty-video.html).

Teenage girls who get pregnant and adolescents as a whole are shamed and
stigmatised for being sexually active. But if 65% percent of youth are in fact
having sex but are left to fend for themselves with regard to sexual
knowledge, what does that say about Kazakhstan as a society?

Turning a blind eye to a problem does not eliminate it. [Meta-
analyses](https://www.thecommunityguide.org/sites/default/files/publications/hiv-
ajpm-evrev-riskreduction.pdf) of 89 sexual education programs in the United
States proved that restrictive approaches that stress abstinence from all
sexual contact do not help the cause either. In addition to swelling the
populations of state orphanages, sexual health illiteracy leads to teenage
abortions, poor reproductive health, early marriages and poor educational and
economic opportunities for young parents. Overwhelmingly, Kazakhstan's
government and civil society have chosen to ignore this problem.

![](https://globalvoices.org/wp-
content/uploads/2018/07/35520945_10156261152458617_3766583973816303616_n-800x570.jpg)

This is why I launched a youth-friendly online platform
[UyatEmes.kz](https://uyatemes.kz/). The website's name means “No Shame” or
“Not a Shame” and provides short articles on topics like puberty, bullying,
relationships, sex, contraception and others.

[UyatEmes.kz](https://uyatemes.kz/) offers young people a space where they can
anonymously ask our consultants questions about sexual and reproductive
health, even extremely personal ones. They can also share their experiences
and read stories written by adult contributors recalling difficult
[experiences](https://uyatemes.kz/archives/1529) in adolescence.

The platform is not only for youth, but parents as well. It exists in both
Kazakh and Russian, which is important, as Kazakh-language resources on sexual
health are virtually non-existent.

UyatEmes.kz is a work in progress. In the future I plan to add an interactive
game that would teach young people practical decision-making skills around
issues such dealing with sexual harassment and peer pressure.

The main message I want to deliver through UyatEmes.kz is that sexual and
reproductive health is not a shameful subject, and that having knowledge about
these matters is the right of every person.

![](https://globalvoices.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/08/5-800x492.png)

Unsurprisingly, shortly after the launch of the platform, some _uyatmen_
showed up. In the comments section under my interview on YouTube they
discussed how a woman like me deserves to die and put forth proposals on how
exactly that should happen. When I had recovered from the initial shock, I
reassured myself that there would be no need for a project like mine if
everybody agreed that Kazakh youth were in need of better sexual health
awareness.

After all, if my cousin’s _agai_ had not been afraid of talking frankly with
his students, those boys would probably have found the courage to ask him
questions they could not ask anyone else. If the state and society had taken
active measures to educate youth on safe sexual practices, many young women
would not resort to abandoning their babies on roadsides. If each of us makes
a personal commitment to educate ourselves on sexual and reproductive health
and to start discussing such issues in our families, maybe adolescents will
have more trust in us and share their problems.

One online platform cannot solve all these problems. But if
[UyatEmes.kz](https://uyatemes.kz/) helps at least one boy or girl towards a
better future, I would consider that I'd made a change.

_**Karlygash Kabatova is the founder and manager of UyatEmes.kz.**_

