![](https://ar.globalvoices.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/06/act-for-
ghouta-800x450.jpg)

Safa and her children before leaving Jobar, Eastern Ghouta. Photo by Safa,
used with permission.

My name is Safa. I was born 30 years ago. Today, I'm a mother of three
children: the eldest is five years old and the youngest is less than a year.
Three months ago, Assad's forces killed my husband during the constant
shelling of our town, near Jobar in Eastern Ghouta. Now I am alone, sad and
tired.

My story started one Thursday. A Thursday that separates the years of siege,
bombardment and death from the unknown future on the other side. The story
started when the men said farewell to us and went to the front lines. We
stayed, women and children, in the back lines of the Jobar front. We did not
have any choice but to wait, consumed by continuous brutal, horrific shelling,
and by continuously having to move to escape certain death.

The men came back on Friday morning, preceded by disappointment, as the
factions’ leaders had announced surrender. This meant handing the rebel areas
over to the Assad regime and being forced out of our homes. We had lost all
hope. Of being able to defend ourselves. Of being able to live and die near
the soil that had embraced us since we were born and witnessed our childhoods.
We would be forced to leave the town that had offered us its schools, whose
fruit we had eaten, in whose neighborhoods we had played, whose residents we'd
befriended, in whose buildings we had worked. It was the time of farewell and
departure.

This is how the time of our departure arrived—without our having a say in
determining our destiny, without our being asked about what we wanted. Maybe
some of us wanted to leave, but others wanted to stay in their houses and
accept life under the control of the regime that killed, displaced, tortured
and besieged us. But no one asked us what we wanted, as if that was not our
destiny.

So, we will be forcibly displaced, in order to maintain our principles,
dignity and freedom. But this injustice is painful, and it burns my memory, or
what remained of it.

Assad's forces got closer to our house on Friday afternoon. That morning, we
buried our 14-year-old cousin Mostafa. We gathered our few belongings,
preparing to leave. When Assad's forces arrived, the rebels withdrew, the town
notables disappeared and we were left alone, facing the unknown.

Outside the house, people were carrying their bags and did not know where to
go, moving chaotically in different directions. Everyone was asking everyone:
where are we going? Where are the buses heading?

We headed to Jobar, my ancestors’ land, the land that Assad destroyed with
what his force and equipment, the land that had resisted and intimidated those
forces, militias and allies for a long time. That gracious land embraced us in
our last days in Eastern Ghouta.

The torturous search for the buses assigned to the forcibly displaced and for
ways to leave the town started in Jobar. We knew that the green buses were in
Arbin city and those who wanted to leave should go there and wait in the
streets for their turn to come. Everything was shrouded in ambiguity. No clear
information about arrangements or destinations was available.

In Jobar city, we stayed for three days near our dear martyrs: my husband,
brother and cousin. We spent our last days there next to their graves, talking
to them, crying for our loss and saying farewell. We met our relatives and
others dear to us there, also saying farewell to their loved ones under the
ground.

We went to Arbin via Zamalka. The scenes we witnessed were heart-breaking.
People were sleeping in the streets awaiting their destiny, powerless.

Getting on the buses happened through nepotism. Even in such a situation,
corruption controlled us. We registered our names with more than one faction,
fearing that we might lose the chance for salvation.

A convoy of buses arrived in Arbin, at a location controlled by one of the
fighting factions in Eastern Ghouta. I ran towards them carrying two of my
children while the third ran alongside me holding on to my clothes. The place
was unlike anything I've ever seen: countless people, fear and horror
everywhere. I still hear my children's cries every time I remember that scene.

Those responsible for organizing the boarding of the buses wanted their
relatives and friends to get on first. They called their names, and the
relatives and friends pushed past the crowds of other women and children,
stepping on those who fell on the ground. No one had any idea what was
happening. Saving oneself was the aim.

After suffering in front of the bus door for more than an hour, being pushed
to and fro in that crowd, we got on the bus that would carry us into the
unknown. That bus on which we used to travel to summer resorts and beaches, to
enjoy the beauty of a country that now rejects us, that same bus carried us
sad, defeated and filled with pain to an unknown destination. “Who will host
us? Where will we live? How will we sleep?” Many questions were revolving in
my mind that day.

The bus moved off. It was the last time we saw the destruction and the rubble
we'd lived under and which had buried many of our dear ones, the last time we
inhaled that air saturated with death.

The bus arrived at the first gathering point. The occupiers appeared in front
of us: those people whom I had refused to be smuggled out of Ghouta to
continue my education in order to avoid seeing. Now we were meeting face to
face. I maintained a steely determination, keeping my gaze free, refusing
their tyranny and saying to them in my mind: “I am triumphant. I am
undefeated, despite all your weapons, you criminals.”

At the checkpoint, a Russian officer boarded the bus and welcomed us, smiling
as though that would make us forget his occupation of our houses. Then Syrian
name-takers and investigators, male and female, got on the bus. Their eyes
were filled with fear, while our gazes were strong and defiant. Yes, we had
lost our land, but we had not lost our dignity, identity and respect for
ourselves.

The buses moved on and we passed through the checkpoint to the gathering
point. There, we waited until the rest of the convoy arrived to start the
journey by night.

Our convoy arrived in Damascus, my dear Damascus. Finally, I saw it, but it
was not free as I would have liked; it was handcuffed by the manacles of the
accursed jailer. It is my Damascus, mine and my ancestors’ land. Beloved
Damascus with its roads, streets, pavements and jasmine. How cruel this
farewell scene was! I told myself that I would come back one day, swearing it
by the blood of my martyrs, I will. Oh… my heart was crying and my eyes were
filled with tears.

The buses passed through the Damascus streets, where the crowds of people
stared at us. Some eyes expressed sadness at our forcible displacement; other
faces expressed happiness and laughter, and others frowned. Some people waved
to us but others seemed afraid and tentative. I waved back, saying goodbye, I
will return, this is a promise I made to myself and to those I left under the
virtuous ground there.

The convoy was on its way. To where we did not know. Along the way, people
cursed us and threw stones. From cars belonging to Assad militias driving next
to us, people threw dirt, took photos and mocked us. They did not know that
our souls were satisfied and our dignity intact.

The convoy, as slow as a turtle, arrived in Qalat al Madiq, our bones and
bodies wracked with pain from to the long hours in those narrow seats.
Children were crying and adults were exhausted with nausea, dizziness and
fear. That was the worst trip ever for most of us, a long, arduous trip
through the beautiful landscapes of our beloved Syria.

The plan was to drive us through areas that supported the Regime. People were
standing on both sides of the road throwing hard stones, trying to break the
windows above our heads and shouting poisoned words that showed their
ugliness. On the bus we remained calm but confused, enveloped by sadness and
grief.

In al Madiq town, people welcomed us cheerfully and generously, a welcome that
assuaged some of the pain we carried. They helped us carry our luggage to
another bus whose destination we didn't know, but which they said was heading
to some kind of accommodation center. What a neverending trip!

The roads here were different. The sun was shining, sending its rays
everywhere, a beautiful scene. We did not close our eyes, though we were so
tired. After 24 hours on the road we had arrived in our final destination, a
mosque in Idlib city called al Rahman Mosque.

Remember my story. My name is Safa. I was born thirty years ago. I was
forcibly displaced from my home with my three children. I'm now alone, sad and
tired.

