![](https://globalvoices.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/07/DSC6420.jpg)

Maryam Palizgir is a visual artist. Photo by Mohammad Jahangir and used with
permission.

This is part of a series done by Omid Memarian for Global Voices called _[How
globalization, identity and culture intersect in
art.](https://globalvoices.org/specialcoverage/how-globalization-identity-and-
culture-intersect-in-art/)_

Maryam Palizgir is an Iranian-born artist and designer who currently lives and
works in the U.S. Her work is interdisciplinary in nature, combining two and
three dimensional drawing, sculptural painting and installations focusing on
the interaction of geometric abstract forms, color, reflective objects and the
layering of grid-like materials.

Palizgir, who currently teaches art at the Ernest Welch school of Art at
Georgia State University, has exhibited in Iran, several European countries,
the U.S. and Russia, and has been the recipient of numerous international and
Iranian awards.

Her current work, _Folded Mystery,_ explores how knowledge is exchanged, how
perception widens perspective, and how observation deepens the understanding
of reality. “I seek works of art that activate once the viewer is involved,”
says Palizgir. “ _Folded Mystery_ is about challenging viewers’ perceptions.”

In this interview Palizgir talks about her work, her experience as an Iranian
artist, and the constraints this has presented due to both state censorship of
artistic expression in Iran and Western stereotypes of Iranians in the U.S.

_Excerpts from the interview follows:_

**Omid Memarian (OM): How was your experience of attending art school in the
United States different from Iran?**

**Maryam Palizgir (MP)** : The graduate program here in the U.S. is designed
for artists who want to incorporate media into their artistic practice and
want to expand into areas such as performance, installation, interactive and
relational art forms. In my MFA studies, my professors encouraged me to find
my own style through three years of course work, art history seminars,
interdisciplinary seminars and studio practice. The curriculum for the MFA
program in the US is based on developing critical thinking, studio practice
and critiques, which are essential for a contemporary artist to develop their
fine art vocabulary.

These program elements are not present in Iran. There is no Master of Fine
Arts program in Iran that focuses on an interdisciplinary art practice. In a
Master of Arts program in Iran, one focuses on only one discipline, for
example, painting or sculpture or photography.

![](https://globalvoices.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/07/DSC3957-400x267.jpg)

Palizgir in her studio. Photo by Mohammad Jahangirl. Used with permission.

**OM: Was there a difference in terms of the freedom to experiment with
different subjects?**

**MP** : In the U.S., there is no limitation on subjects or their treatment.
As an artist here I can work freely on any social or political subject.

In Iran, I am not free to make a statement that might be against [the
government’s] political or social views, and censorship has a significant
effect on artistic expression. For instance, part of my practice is making
installation and performance art about environmental issues but I could not
address such issues in the same way in Iran.

For my _Earth Vessel_ project I addressed Iran’s Lake Urmia crisis, and after
working with scientists, discovered the same phenomenon is happening in the
U.S.’s Salt Lake in Utah. I wanted to make a series visualizing these two
lakes together as scientists call them “twins.” Due to censorship constraints
in Iran, I showed only the Lake Urmia component of this project but I had
wanted to present both together, creating a bridge between the two cultures
with what is happening to the two lakes.

Working on environmental issues, like water scarcity, is a red line for
artists (and also activists) in Iran. Drought is considered a national
security issue in the country, and it is a sensitive issue as experts blame
the authorities for mismanagement of the country’s water resources.

**OM:** **T** **he art community—galleries, collectors and art schools—in the
West, especially the U.S., often views artists from the Middle East (including
Iran) through a stereotypical lens. Have you experienced this?**

**MP** : In the U.S. art community, especially among curators and gallery
owners, I am seen as an artist born and raised in a particular geography and
culture and I am expected to create art that conforms to their stereotypes in
subject and form. I am often asked to add elements of calligraphy, Islamic
motifs, or political issues to my art practice. I don’t want this Western
projection of me—or censorship from the Iranian side. I want to be seen as a
visual artist and to express my art through any subject and in any form and to
blur these boundaries. We need other non-Western artists to make art on
universal subjects to break through these barriers.

![](https://globalvoices.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/07/DSC_1518-400x267.jpg)

“I am seen as an artist born and raised in a particular geography and culture
and I am expected to create art that conforms to their stereotypes in subject
and form. I am often asked to add elements of calligraphy, Islamic motifs, or
political issues to my art practice. I don’t want this Western projection of
me—or censorship from the Iranian side. ” Image from Mohammad Jahangir. Used
with permission.

**OM** : **In your latest collection,** ** _Folded Mystery_** **, none of
these cultural elements are present. It’s abstract, interpretive, and
enigmatic. But are these characteristics still connected to a perception of
the art that comes from the East?**

MP: Well, there is no doubt that my sociocultural context shaped my visual
memory and affected my art practice. In the _Folded Mystery_ project, I have
tried to go beyond the Eastern art clichés, using a dynamic combination of
materials, methods, concepts and subjects that challenge traditional
boundaries and defy easy definition.

_Folded Mystery_ embodies the complexity of simplicity and points out that
perception can widen our perspective through displacement. Moreover, through
cross-fertilization of drawing, sculpture and photography, _Folded Mystery_
stimulates a questioning of vision and perception. I believe that critical
thinking is deeply rooted in Eastern art and culture.

**OM: How is the issue of identity reflected in your work?**

MP: Before moving to the U.S., I made a piece titled _Identity_ while doing a
residency in south France. In 2015, I criticized the idea of national identity
versus universal identity through this 3-dimensional installation. I am
committed to the idea of being global citizenship, having rights and civic
responsibilities that come with being a member of the world, with a whole-
world philosophy and sensibilities, rather than as a citizen of a particular
nation or place.

After moving to the U.S., intercultural experiences affected my art practice
subtly. I experienced interdisciplinary art, the study-based process,
postmodern architecture, minimalism and deconstructivism from Western
culture—plus abstract geometric forms, repetitions, space cognition and light
value exploration from Eastern culture.

![](https://globalvoices.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/07/Earth-
Vessels2-400x267.jpg)

Earth-vessels, a piece from the new _Folded Mystery_ collection. Image
provided by Palizgir.

**OM:** **Can you describe for us** **the current art scene in Iran?**

**MP:** The Iran art scene has grown in the past decade. Many professional art
galleries have opened in Tehran, with emerging and established artists getting
involved with monographic or experimental shows, artist talks and art events
every month. Also, artist residency programs are being established, as well as
art and cultural exchange programs to help young artists experiment outside
the country. For me, it was a turning point in my art when I attended the
Cornelius Arts Foundation residency program in France in 2014. Iran is not
accurately portrayed in the media, and there is a lot happening that doesn’t
get seen outside the country.

To improve the art scene in Iran, we need infrastructure, more critical
writing and art funding. Recent political and economic developments,
especially those emanating from the U.S., have had an effect on Iranian
artists and the art scene in Iran. I hope the expanded art community in Iran
can open new horizons for Iranian artists.

