![](https://globalvoices.org/wp-
content/uploads/2018/06/17915__dsc-4436-800x533.jpg)_**The following is a
version of a[partner post](https://chai-khana.org/en/nagorno-karabakh-a-
mother-in-the-minefields) by Global Voices’ partner [Chai-
Khana.org](http://chai-khana.org/en). Text and photos by [Knar
Babayan](https://chai-khana.org/en/author/knar-babayan "Knar Babayan").**_

From a distance, the three sappers all look the same – high boots, trousers
with deep pockets, a special helmet, protective visor and gloves. Many locals
in Nagorno Karabakh, a relatively traditional society, assume they are men.
But these are women, and, like men, when they head into potential minefields,
they are doing so to help their families survive.

“I’m doing it for my family, to provide my children with a safe and better
future,” explains 38-year-old sapper Kristine Khachatryan, the married mother
of three boys, ages six to 18.

![](https://globalvoices.org/wp-
content/uploads/2018/06/17928__dsc-9003-800x533.jpg)

When Khachatryan comes home on the weekends, her six-year-old son Nairi
follows her every step.

For years after its conflict with Azerbaijani forces in the early 1990s,
Nagorno Karabakh routinely posted 20 or more annual civilian casualties from
landmines and unexploded ordnance.

The Halo Trust, a British mine-clearing organization which has operated here
for the last 18 years, now declares Karabakh is 90-percent mine-free, but the
potential threat remains. Just this March, a mine explosion in the Martakert
region took the lives of three sappers and wounded two villagers.

Taking on demining is no easy decision. But three years ago, when Halo Trust
began to recruit its first women sappers, Khachatryan, a village-council
accountant from Artashavi, 80 kilometers to the southwest of Karabakh’s main
town, Stepanakert, decided to apply.

![](https://globalvoices.org/wp-
content/uploads/2018/06/17927__dsc-1606-800x533.jpg)

After checking and finding no mines in one spot on a piece of land near the
village of Karegah, Khachatryan marks off a new area for demining.

She did so “out of curiosity” — in 2013, two mine explosions near Artashavi
had wounded several locals — but also out of financial necessity.

Khachatryan’s husband, Garik Ohanjanyan, a former school teacher, was
unemployed.

Work as a sapper, which pays 225,000 drams (about $464) a month and comes with
insurance, roughly quadrupled her income.

![](https://globalvoices.org/wp-
content/uploads/2018/06/17924__dsc-1534-800x533.jpg)

”Of course, it's not easy to be a sapper. Of course, my family worries about
me,” says Khachatryan. “I also worry and try to follow all the safety rules.
If you are following the safety rules, you can keep yourself safe. The golden
rule of doing a dangerous job is to be safe.”

Once certified, though, she did not expect to stay on the job for long. She
accepted the post since the first demining field was close to Artashavi,
within easy reach of her family.

“Of course, I was worried in the beginning,” she recounts, “but later I
understood that there is no bad work. There are just bad people. And now I’m
proud that I’m doing a big and important humanitarian job.”

![](https://globalvoices.org/wp-
content/uploads/2018/06/17926__dsc-1773-800x533.jpg)

Even in the field, Khachatryan makes a point of painting her nails, wearing
makeup and tending to her hair. Women should always look feminine, no matter
what work they do, she says.

The fact that she also was a pioneer never occurred to her.

“Before becoming a sapper, I never thought that this was a ‘man’s job’ or
about how I should work in a man’s world,” Khachatryan continues.

“You have completely different things on your mind when you enter a
minefield,” such as routine daily matters or your family, she adds.

Halo Trust’s 11 female sappers work in three teams, each with a male lead. The
organization intends to train women as team leaders and drivers, says project
coordinator Anna Israelyan.

![](https://globalvoices.org/wp-
content/uploads/2018/06/17916__dsc-0137-800x533.jpg)

Very often, sappers work in fields far from their main base, usually a rented
house in a nearby village or town. For this reason, sometimes a small, demined
part of a field is turned into an open-air kitchen where they can eat and
relax. On cold, rainy days, they also dry their clothes there.

They spend Monday through Friday in the field. Getting to the field station, a
rented house in a village or town, can take time on Karabakh’s rough roads –
over two hours to travel 65 kilometers by taxi, for instance. Public
transportation does not always exist.

Khachatryan’s day starts at 7am each Monday. Already dressed for fieldwork,
she quickly checks her mine-clearance equipment and drinks a cup of tea or
coffee while running out the door.

![](https://globalvoices.org/wp-
content/uploads/2018/06/17917__dsc-0097-800x533.jpg)

Most of this territory near the village of Karegah in the Kashatagh region had
already been demined when Khachatryan and her team came to the spot, shown
here in the winter of 2016. During their week of work here, Khachtryan found
one mine. She says that she feels nothing in particular when she finds a mine;
the emotions hit after it has been deactivated.

In her absence, her husband and sons — 18-year-old Gor, 16-year-old Tigran and
six-year-old Nairi — have had to learn how to clean the house, cook, wash
dishes and use the washing machine.

Khachatryan’s husband and three sons handle all the housework while she is
away during the week de-mining.

Next year, when her oldest son, Gor, 18, heads to Stepanakert for two years of
compulsory military service, she wants her two younger sons to follow him so
that they can see each other and have access to more sports.

![](https://globalvoices.org/wp-
content/uploads/2018/06/17925__dsc-1630-800x533.jpg)

During her breaks on the Karegah field, Khachatryan made a sapper snowman to
photograph and email to her sons.

The boys still do not think that demining is appropriate work for a woman, but
they are proud of their mother when she appears in news stories.

Khachatryan herself concedes that “I don’t always feel myself in harmony as a
woman, as a mother and as a sapper.” She would like to organize her work so
that she has more time for her family; particularly, her youngest son, who was
just three when she began demining.

Nonetheless, she believes that “women are not inferior to men professionally.”

![](https://globalvoices.org/wp-
content/uploads/2018/06/17931__dsc-9423-800x533.jpg)

To make up for her absence during the week, Khachatryan tries to buy something
tasty for her sons on the weekends. Here, with her husband, Garik, reflected
in the mirror, she warms up French fries for lunch.

For some people, though, the mine explosion this March was a warning that it
was time to change her profession. Many friends and relatives began to phone
and ask whether she would leave her work, Khachatryan says.

“Honestly speaking, I had no sense of fear entering a minefield after that
accident,” she elaborates. “It was deeply painful to me as a human being and I
had a sense of huge responsibility to continue the work of my friends.”

She intends to stay on the job.

