[![Enfants Malgaches par Yves Picq - CC-BY-
SA-3.0](https://fr.globalvoicesonline.org/wp-content/uploads/2014/06/1024px-
Madagascar_1725a-800x533.jpg)](http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/Category:Children_of_Madagascar#mediaviewer/File:Madagascar_1725a.JPG)

Malagasy children by Yves Picq – CC-BY-SA-3.0

_[This article was written by an invited author, Andry R. Razafimbahoaka. The
article was then edited by Global Voices for context and clarification]_

Since the [Convention on the Rights of the
Child](https://www.ohchr.org/en/professionalinterest/pages/crc.aspx) was
signed in 1991, Madagascar has been multiplying its efforts to implement
policies that protect child rights and created more than[ 750 child protection
networks](https://www.unicef.org/madagascar/fr/protection.html) within the
country since 2004. Despite this progress, abuse, violence, sexual
exploitation and forced labor are still a tragic reality which silently occurs
behind closed doors. According to a report released by the Malagasy State and
UNICEF, every second young Malagasy claims to have been the victim of violence
at school, and nine kids out of ten have been beaten by their family.

### An alarming report by UNICEF

Following a request by the Malagasy government, UNICEF carried out a [study on
violence perpetrated against
children](https://weshare.unicef.org/Detail/2AMZIFV23XY5) in the country. The
result of the study is beyond
[alarming](http://www.rfi.fr/afrique/20180619-madagascar-violences-envers-
enfants-font-parties-vie-quotidienne-chatiments):

> 89% des enfants disent qu’ils ont été violentés physiquement un jour au sein
> de leur foyer. Et pourtant ils sont 72% à dire qu’ils se sentent en sécurité
> chez eux.

> 89% of children report having suffered from physical domestic abuse at least
> once. Nonetheless, 72% of them say they feel safe at home.

Globally, the report highlights that violence is very often rooted in
traditional practices which are very difficult to challenge. Rajae Sbihi, a
child psychiatrist who partook to the study, [explains:
](http://www.rfi.fr/afrique/20180619-madagascar-violences-envers-enfants-font-
parties-vie-quotidienne-chatiments)

> La violence est considérée comme une méthode éducative, que ce soit dans le
> milieu familial ou à l’école

> Violence is considered as a means of education, whether it is at home or at
> school.

[![Jeunes filles malgaches par Hery Zo Rakotondramana on FlickR - CC BY-SA 2.0
](https://fr.globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2014/09/Malagasy_girls_Madagascar_Merina-800x531.jpg)](https://www.flickr.com/photos/saveoursmile/5614134410/in/photostream)

Young Malagasy girls by Hery Zo Rakotondramana on FlickR – CC BY-SA 2.0

According to Sbihi, children in rural communities are even more at risk to
violence, explaining that almost 20% of Malagasy children are not registered
at birth – particularly in remote districts – which increases their
vulnerability. Public powers are indeed often one of the only safeguards for
child victims of violence, even more, if it happens at home. This type of
violence leads to severe wounds, trauma, physical and emotional development
troubles, risky behaviors or even dropping out of school altogether.

### Different types of violence

Besides physical violence, there is a range of scenarios which hinders
children development. In fact, 40% of young Malagasy's report having worked
before the age of 18. Laureate Rasolofoniainarison, national administrator of
projects at the office of the OIT _(in English ILO: International Labour
Organization)_ in Antananarivo, explains how this [perpetuates the cycle of
poverty](https://www.temoignages.re/international/monde/faire-travailler-
leurs-enfants-les-rend-pauvres,93353):

> les parents disent souvent qu’ils les envoient travailler au lieu d’aller à
> l’école parce qu’ils sont pauvres. En réalité c’est le fait de faire
> travailler leurs enfants qui les rend pauvres, en perpétuant un cycle dans
> lequel l’éducation et la possibilité de s’élever socialement n’ont aucune
> place.

> Parents often say that they send them to work instead of going to school
> because they are poor. In reality, making their children work is what makes
> them poor, by perpetuating a cycle in which education and the possibility of
> rising socially have no place.

Young girls are even more vulnerable to this violence. Early marriage is part
of the Malagasy tradition and is a problem for minors. More than one-third of
girls between the ages of 15 and 19-years-old are already married or in a
relationship. Very few teenagers use contraceptive methods (less than 8%)
which considerably increases the number of unwanted pregnancies. In fact, [30%
of the minors in the island have a
child](http://geopolis.francetvinfo.fr/madagascar-mariees-meres-et-
mineures-160297), as reported by a rating from the World Atlas 2015. This
number reaches up to [50% in some
areas](http://geopolis.francetvinfo.fr/madagascar-mariees-meres-et-
mineures-160297) of the capital. Another alarming statistic is the
[rising](http://www.linfo.re/ocean-indien/madagascar/687972-exploitation-
sexuelle-des-enfants-un-phenomene-inquietant-a-madagascar) rate of [sexual
exploitation of girls for commercial purposes,](http://www.univ-
antananarivo.mg/IMG/pdf/rakotomamonjy_marinah_master2.pdf) particularly [near
petroleum and mining
sites](https://www.ohchr.org/EN/HRBodies/HRC/.../A_HRC_25_48_Add.2_SPA.doc).

### A new tool to better fight violence

Before this report, children's needs and rights were unknown in Madagascar.
This latest report is seen as a tool which allows child protection advocates
to better understand, prevent and respond to these risky situations. It is
also a first step towards a more comprehensive national policy which aims to
reduce violence. It can also be used as an argumentative tool to convince
people to let go of traditional practices which can be detrimental to
children. In total, UNICEF has deployed 240 social volunteers on the island to
provide psycho-social support, communal dialogue and social mobilisation.

UNICEF has also established partnerships in order to develop a code of conduct
for all mining employees and sub-contractors in Madagascar, in an effort to
end young women's sexual exploitation. This practical approach should
hopefully have a progressive impact on their protection in the next few years.

