![](https://globalvoices.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/08/naipaul_reading.jpg)

V. S. Naipaul reads at the University of the West Indies in Trinidad in April
2007. (PHOTO: Georgia Popplewell (CC BY-NC-ND 2.0)

He was the rare literary figure of sufficient notoriety that newspapers had
kept draft obituaries on file for decades. When news broke on August 11 that
V.S. Naipaul had died at the age of 85, press coverage was swift and
voluminous. It was a front-page story in Trinidad and Tobago’s three daily
newspapers, the Nobel laureate’s photograph blown up above the headlines.

On the social networks where most of T&T’s public debate now unfolds, some
commenters pounced on the detail that the international press described
Naipaul as a British writer. “He would have loved that,” was a typical
response. For those who disapprove of Naipaul—and he courted disapproval—one
longstanding grouse was his supposed disavowal of Trinidad, the island where
he was born and grew up. We remember the sting of Naipaul’s statement on
receiving the 2001 Nobel Prize: “It is a great tribute to both England, my
home, and to India, the home of my ancestors, and to the dedication and
support of my agent.” Full stop. So, to be elegised as British: surely that
was his wish all along?

![](https://globalvoices.org/wp-
content/uploads/2018/08/TT_newspapers_naipaul.png)

V. S. Naipaul's death makes the front pages of all three daily newspapers in
Trinidad and Tobago. “For those who disapprove of Naipaul—and he courted
disapproval—one longstanding grouse was his supposed disavowal of Trinidad,
the island where he was born and grew up.”

But the facts are complicated. Born in a British colony, Naipaul was a British
subject when he left Trinidad in 1950, 18 years old, on a hard-won scholarship
to Oxford. He was permanently settled in London by the time Trinidad and
Tobago became an independent nation in 1962. He was “British” all along, and
at the same time he never really belonged in his adopted country. The evidence
is plain to read in his books.

Naipaul was “Trinidadian to the core,”
[says](https://newsday.co.tt/2018/08/12/trini-to-the-core-2/) Kenneth
Ramchand, the eminent literary scholar. “Trinidad made him. It shaped him, and
even when he was vexed with Trinidad, it haunted him throughout his career.”
I’d go further and say Naipaul was the most Trinidadian writer Trinidad has
produced, in all good and bad ways. “A House for Mr. Biswas” remains the
closest thing we have to a Great Trinidadian Novel, with its unsentimental
portrait of an Indo-Trinidadian family striving for a sense of coherence and
self-determination in a small society “at once exceedingly simple and
exceedingly confused.” “The Suffrage of Elvira” is the most valuable primer
for anyone trying to understand T&T’s incorrigibly tribal politics (according
to no lesser authority than the political theorist [Lloyd
Best](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lloyd_Best)). “The Loss of El Dorado” is
still the most bracing and penetrating history of colonial Trinidad. And the
picaresque stories of “Miguel Street”, Naipaul’s breakthrough book, have more
pervasively influenced subsequent Trinidadian fiction writers than any other
text.

Naipaul always portrayed his writing as a quest for self-understanding: “I had
to do the books I did because there were no books about those subjects to give
me what I wanted.” And “those subjects” are the historical circumstances into
which he was born, in the Trinidad of 1932. In the essay “Prologue to an
Autobiography”, he offered a summary:

> “… there was a migration from India to be considered, a migration within the
> British empire. There was my Hindu family, with its fading memories of
> India; there was India itself. And there was Trinidad, with its past of
> slavery, its mixed population, its racial antagonisms and its changing
> political life; once part of Venezuela and the Spanish empire, now English-
> speaking, with the American base and an open-air cinema…. And there was my
> own presence in England, writing….
>
> “So step by step, book by book … I eased myself into knowledge.”

“I am the sum of my books,” he said. And the self he created in his books was
deliberately free of loyalties to anything but writing itself. He strove to
achieve “a freedom from people, from entanglements, from rivalries, from
competition.” He added: “one doesn’t have a side, doesn’t have a country,
doesn’t have a community; one is entirely an individual.” This stance put
Naipaul in conflict with many other Caribbean writers, and indeed with many
Caribbean readers.

For decades, Caribbean literature has been animated by unresolved arguments
about responsibility, language, authenticity — about how to be a Caribbean
writer. Naipaul remained aloof from these debates. The relatively good-
humoured satire of his early fiction set in Trinidad matured in the 1960s into
a sharper, more pessimistic criticism of what Naipaul saw as the pretensions
of post-Independence Caribbean societies—“half-made,” inhabited by “mimic
men.” As he travelled more widely, he extended his scrutiny to other
postcolonial nations in Asia, Africa, and South America. Nowhere did he pull
his punches. He was accused of exaggerating the squalor of India, of hostility
to Islam. His descriptions of black Caribbean people and Africans often seem
to betray racial anxiety, if not outright prejudice.

And in a spirit of serious mischief, he baited his critics with outrageous
remarks. In a profile published soon after Naipaul won the Nobel Prize, my
colleague Jeremy Taylor [listed some memorable slurs](https://www.caribbean-
beat.com/issue-53/guerilla-vs-naipaul):

> “Over the years, he has called people _monkeys_ , _infies_ (inferiors),
> _bow-and-arrow men_ , _potato eaters_ , _Mr Woggy_. He has described whole
> countries as ‘bush.’ Oxford University, where he earned his degree in
> English, was ‘a very second-rate provincial university.’ Africa ‘has no
> future,’ and as for African literature, ‘you can’t beat a novel out on
> drums.’ He once recommended that Britain should sell knighthoods through the
> Post Office (this was before he became Sir Vidia Naipaul).”

Trinidadians ought to recognise these provocations as his version of our very
own picong, the mocking, merciless banter perfected by our calypsonians. We
should understand his impish public conduct as Naipaul “playing himself,” as
Trinidadians describe the performance of a carefully crafted persona that at
once masks and reveals. His biographer Patrick French quotes the Barbadian
writer George Lamming’s suggestion that Naipaul was “playing ole mas” —
“masquerading or making trouble for his own entertainment, a Trinidadian
trait.” French adds: “when he was being rude or provocative in this way,
Naipaul was full of glee.” This is the irony that exposed the man behind the
writer: he was never more Trinidadian than when he was bad-talking Trinidad.

![](https://globalvoices.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/08/world-is-what-it-
is.jpeg)

“No one can come away from [Patrick] French’s biography ‘The World Is What It
Is’ without feeling repulsed by Naipaul’s bigotries, his misogyny, his
cruelties aimed at loved ones and strangers alike. But then there are his
books, written in prose of beautiful rigour and clarity, their relentless
probings sometimes finding an unexpected tenderness.”

And so the most thoughtful responses to his death have also been the most
conflicted. No one can come away from French’s biography “The World Is What It
Is” without feeling repulsed by Naipaul’s bigotries, his misogyny, his
cruelties aimed at loved ones and strangers alike. But then there are his
books, written in prose of beautiful rigour and clarity, their relentless
probings sometimes finding an unexpected tenderness.

His lifelong subject was how the unfeeling forces of history — especially the
huge movements of peoples between and within cultures, driven by the colonial
enterprise — play out in the lives of ordinary people. He was fascinated by
the making and remaking of the individual demanded by these dislocations. His
family, the island of his birth, the far-flung places he travelled to, and his
own misunderstandings and illusions were equally apt for scrutiny. And his
books, at their best, give us portraits of our societies and ourselves which
we can’t deny, even when we’d prefer to. There are books of Naipaul’s I hope
never to read again, and books of his without which I can’t understand the
world I was born into.

“Everything of value about me is in my books.” That may be the truest sentence
Naipaul wrote. It’s not a question of whether the work justifies the sins of
the man. That is too simple an equation. The power and, yes, the beauty of his
writing is in some way the product of the writer’s flaws, and also in some way
transcends those flaws, without absolving them. The moral algebra of art is
difficult, and it should trouble us. There is no better example than the books
of V.S. Naipaul. It is one of the reasons—the great reason—I feel compelled to
read him.

_**Nicholas Laughlin edited a revised and expanded edition of V.S. Naipaul's
early family correspondence, Letters Between a Father and Son (2009).**_

_([Feature
image](https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:VS_Naipaul_2016_Dhaka.jpg) by
[Faizul Latif
Chowdhury](https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/User:Faizul_Latif_Chowdhury
"User:Faizul Latif Chowdhury"), via Wikimedia Commons)._

