![](https://advox.globalvoices.org/wp-
content/uploads/2014/09/Turkey_protests_June2013_Mstyslav-
Chernov_CCBYSA3-800x532.jpg)

Demonstrators bound for Taksim Square in June 2013. Photo by Mstyslav Chernov
via Wikimedia Commons (CC BY-SA 3.0)

#### The Advox Netizen Report offers an international snapshot of challenges,
victories, and emerging trends in Internet rights around the world.

As Turkish voters went to the polls on June 24 to cast their ballots — and
ultimately re-elect incumbent President Recep Tayyip Erdogan to a fourth term
in office — internet users braced themselves for darkness.

Since the social movements that emerged in Istanbul in 2013, social media
sites like Twitter and YouTube have been knocked off the internet
periodically. Wikipedia has been [blocked
altogether](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Block_of_Wikipedia_in_Turkey) since
April 2017.

Shortly before the election, the Ministry of Transport, Maritime Affairs and
Communications asserted the power to [block “abnormal”
content](https://turkeyblocks.org/2018/05/25/turkey-cyber-security-social-
media-blocking-june-elections/) on social media during elections. This led to
anticipation of more blocked websites, but also demonstrates a higher level of
transparency than in the past. This may be in part a response to pressure from
open internet advocates and researchers both in and outside the country.

Technical researchers affiliated with [NetBlocks](https://netblocks.org/) are
still gathering results from technical testing during the election. NetBlocks
confirmed to Global Voices that there were various power cuts that day, and
that Erdogan’s party, the AKP, pressured Vodafone not to supply temporary cell
towers for opposition rallies.

Turkey has been in a continuous state of “national emergency” since the July
2016 attempted military coup. Though this is now set to [expire in
July](https://www.reuters.com/article/us-turkey-security-emergency/turkeys-
erdogan-alliance-partner-agree-to-lift-state-of-emergency-sabah-
idUSKBN1JO0FH), local experts suspect that the government’s efforts to control
information about matters of public interest will continue.

Journalists and human rights defenders have [paid a heavy
price](https://www.amnesty.org/en/countries/europe-and-central-
asia/turkey/report-turkey/) for their work to hold power to account in the
country, facing harassment, [arrest and
prosecution](https://cpj.org/reports/2017/12/journalists-prison-jail-record-
number-turkey-china-egypt.php), [alongside people
who](https://bianet.org/english/law/198712-5-people-arrested-5-others-
detained-for-insulting-president) have simply criticized Erdogan on social
media.

The Istanbul office of news website sendika.org was
[raided](https://bianet.org/english/media/198688-police-raid-sendika-org) amid
a new investigation launched against its editor, Ali Ergin Demirhan, who was
detained last year on allegations that he had was tried to delegitimize the
results of the referendum. Censorship researchers have found that sendika.org
has been blocked [at least 61
times](https://bianet.org/english/media/188037-blocked-for-49-times-sendika-
org-applies-for-guinness-world-record) in Turkey, since its inception.

Alongside the popular targets of journalists and human rights defenders,
another less common class of online actor has come onto the radar of Turkish
authorities: translators.

A growing number of active social media users are rising to prominence in
various parts of the world by translating news and social media reports for
interested audiences. This is also a potent strategy for increasing attention
around important live events, such as protests or trials.

On June 21, Turkish social media user and translator Sebla Küçük was [indicted
and charged](https://stockholmcf.org/turkish-translator-indicted-over-
translations-of-english-language-news-sources/) with disseminating “terrorist
propaganda” on Twitter. The offending tweets contained only translations of
news bites from English-language media sources on Turkey’s Afrin offensive in
northern Syria earlier in 2018.

Küçük told Diken news website that she suspects the real motivation of the
prosecutor is her translations of the trial of former Halkbank executive
Mehmet Hakan Atilla.

“Obviously [the prosecutor] was troubled by my translations concerning the
Hakan Atilla trial, but since they couldn’t find anything about them, they
filed a case with baseless evidence,” she said.

### **New EU Copyright Directive could kill the internet**

The European Union has come one step closer to passing the [Copyright
Directive](https://eur-
lex.europa.eu/LexUriServ/LexUriServ.do?uri=CELEX:32001L0029:EN:HTML), a
region-wide policy initiative that could upend the free flow of information
online in Europe and the world.

On June 20, the EU Legal Affairs Committee voted in favor of the directive,
which requires major web platforms like Facebook to buy licenses from media
companies before linking to their stories and seeks to implement an “upload
filter” that would assess all content for copyright infringement before it
could be uploaded to the internet. The [sky-high technical
barriers](https://www.wired.com/story/europe-considers-a-new-copyright-law-
heres-why-that-matters/) of such a system have not yet deterred EU leaders.
Alongside the [Wikimedia
Foundation](https://blog.wikimedia.org/2018/06/25/time-is-running-out-to-
defend-user-rights-online/) (which administers Wikipedia), dozens of
technologists, internet policy experts, and advocates have [spoken
out](https://www.eff.org/deeplinks/2018/06/internet-luminaries-ring-alarm-eu-
copyright-filtering-proposal) against the policy.

### **Ethiopia unblocks 264 websites!**

A total of [264 websites](https://ethsat.com/2018/06/ethiopia-
unblocks-264-websites-including-esat/), some of which were censored in
Ethiopia for more than ten years, were unblocked this week at the behest of
the country’s new Prime Minister, Abiy Ahmed. Among those unblocked were
multiple news sites that run critical coverage of the government and political
parties, which had not only been censored, but triggered the arrests of dozens
of media workers under the previous government.

Ethiopia’s new government is [gradually asserting its
power](https://www.cfr.org/blog/ethiopias-long-political-transition-lesson-
others) after the transition from former PM Hailemariam Desalegn, who resigned
in February 2018 amid widespread public protests, rising levels of violence
and a fracturing of the ruling coalition.

### **Egyptian news site censored after only nine hours online**

Despite the barriers and threats to doing journalism in Egypt, some people are
still trying it. Just nine hours after the Arabic Network for Human Rights
Information [launched a news
portal](https://www.madamasr.com/en/2018/06/25/news/u/new-website-documenting-
rights-abuses-blocked-9-hours-after-launch/) featuring stories about human
rights protections and violations in Egypt, the site was blocked on all ISPs.

### **Chinese authorities are not amused by John Oliver**

[Chinese authorities](https://chinadigitaltimes.net/2018/06/john-oliver-
censored-after-roast-of-xi-jinping/) have added the name of British American
comedian John Oliver, and the name of his news comedy show, [Last Week
Tonight](https://www.youtube.com/user/LastWeekTonight), to a list of sensitive
terms that trigger automatic deletion of posts on Chinese social media
platforms Weibo and WeChat. The move came shortly after Oliver in a recent
episode offered a biting (and comical) critique of Chinese government
crackdowns on political and religious expression.

### **Facebook users in Cambodia face legal threats over posts**

In the run-up to the July 29 elections, three Facebook users in Cambodia have
been [brought to court](https://www.phnompenhpost.com/national/third-violator-
lese-majeste-law-arrested) on accusations of violating the country’s newly
passed lèse majesté law, which criminalizes the act of insulting the monarchy.

### **Indonesian authorities can now intercept ‘any conversation’ that could
be linked to terrorist acts**

Indonesia’s new anti-terror law allows authorities to “…intercept any
conversation by telephone or other means of communication suspected of being
used to prepare, plan, and commit a Criminal Act of Terrorism.” Many fear the
law could be used as justification for surveilling human rights defenders or
journalists. [Human Rights Watch](https://www.hrw.org/news/2018/06/20/letter-
indonesias-new-counterterrorism-law) raised the alarm about the provision in a
recent analysis.

Also in Indonesia, spiritual book author Alnoldy Bahari was [found
guilty](http://www.thejakartapost.com/news/2018/05/03/amnesty-international-
blasts-hate-speech-conviction-of-spiritual-book-author.html) of spreading hate
speech on Facebook, a violation of the 2008 Electronic Information and
Transaction Law. A district court in West Java sentenced Bahari to five years
in prison and ordered him to pay a fine of 100 million rupiahs (USD $7,155)
fine. Amnesty International and
[SAFEnet](http://id.safenetvoice.org/2018/04/rilis-pers-tuntutan-5-tahun-
penjara-dan-denda-rp100-juta-pada-alnoldy-bahari-tidak-masuk-akal-dan-
mengabaikan-hak-konstitusi-warga/) have condemned the decision as a violation
of due process rights.

### **Is Trump's fundraising friend selling surveillance tech to Turkey?  
**

Reports from The [New York
Times](https://www.nytimes.com/2018/03/25/us/politics/elliott-broidy-trump-
access-circinus-lobbying.html) and more recently by [The
Intercept](https://theintercept.com/2018/06/22/broidy-circinus-spying-tunisia-
romania-uae/) indicate that a defense company called Circinus run by Donald
Trump fundraiser Elliott Broidy is building web tracking and surveillance
software. Although their authenticity has not been confirmed, documents leaked
to The Intercept appear to be intended to sell the company’s technical
services to the governments of Turkey, Romania, the United Arab Emirates and
Cyprus.

The Circinus website also boasts domestic surveillance services for police and
prison administrators. According to [the company’s
website](https://www.circinus-llc.com/circinus-capabilities/law-enforcement-
correctional-facility-operations/), these services “[allow] for the
collection, aggregation, and analysis of all inmate communication (Skype,
instant messaging, email, social media) as well as the ability to monitor
activity and data extraction.”

### **New research**

  * [Lessons from Global Practices of Zero Rating: How regulators have sought to pick good from bad](https://static1.squarespace.com/static/59b54e6ae45a7cdb519a35ea/t/5af8c9af88251b0baced86b1/1526253999385/revised_zerorating.pdf) – Amba Kak

## [**Subscribe to the Netizen Report**](http://eepurl.com/Y-f11)

[Ellery Roberts Biddle](https://advox.globalvoices.org/author/ellery-roberts-
biddle/), [Mohamed ElGohary](https://advox.globalvoices.org/author/mohamed-
elgohary/), [L. Finch](https://globalvoices.org/author/l-finch/), [Arzu
Geybullayeva](https://globalvoices.org/author/arzu-geybullayeva/), [Juliana
Harsianti](https://globalvoices.org/author/juliana-harsianti/), [Oiwan
Lam](https://advox.globalvoices.org/author/oiwan-lam/), [Mong
Palatino](https://advox.globalvoices.org/author/mong/), [Karolle
Rabarison](https://globalvoices.org/author/karolle-tiana/), and[ Sarah Myers
West](https://advox.globalvoices.org/author/sarahbmyers/) contributed to this
report.

