The Metro subway system in Mexico City is one of the busiest in the world, and
approximately 4.5 million people use this form of public transportation on a
daily basis. Due to this high volume of traffic, it has become a place for a
group of Mexican Muslims to practice
[Da'wah](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dawah), which is a way of preaching the
religion of Islam.

In this video, Mustafa, shows some of the advertisements that have recently
been placed inside the subway cars inviting people to learn about the
religion. The advertisement is from the [Islamic Cultural Center in Mexico
City [es]](http://www.islam.com.mx/index.php), which offers a weekend cultural
event.

Another effort to spread the message of Islam took place on the streets of
Mexico City. This other video shows a van driving up and down the streets of
this neighborhood inviting people to a conference.

According to the most recent census, Mexicans are overwhelming Roman Catholic
at a figure of [88% of the
population](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Religion_in_Mexico#Catholicism). The
2008 Census indicates that there are [25,000 Muslims in the
country](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Islam_in_Mexico), which represents .02%
of the total population.

While much of the activities and public events take place in the Federal
District, there have been some recent coverage on a small group of converts in
the state of Chiapas in southern Mexico. Journalist and blogger Franc
Contreras of _[Mexico Monitor](http://mexicomonitor.blogspot.com/)_ , also
works for Al Jazeera English. In 2008, he traveled here to produce a report on
a group of Mayan indigenous that converted to Islam. Watch the video report
[here](http://mexicomonitor.blogspot.com/2008/03/indigenous-mexicans-turn-to-
islam.html).

There are also Mexican Muslims, who also use blogs to connect with others and
to help spread the message of Islam. Carlos Alberto Rojas, also known as Isa,
studied at the [Islamic University of
Madinah](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Islamic_University_of_Madinah). He also
maintains a blog where he offers up his assistance and support for those with
questions. He [publishes his phone numbers and the times that he is available
to speak [es]](http://verdaderoislam.blogspot.com/2009/08/respuestas-por-
telefono-en-mexico.html) with anyone with questions on Islam, fasting or to
inquire about future events.

