Part Two and Part Three of this post highlights some of the discussions in the
blogosphere and Twittersphere that followed the conterversial interview “The
Japanese web is ‘disappointing': An interview with Mr. Mochio Umeda,
summarized in [Part One](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2009/06/23/japan-on-
how-to-perceive-the-japanese-web-part-one/). [ _All links in this article link
to Japanese content unless otherwise noted._ ]

At the very least, the interview kick-started a serious dialog on how we
perceive the Japanese web and the direction that it's taking. Mochio Umeda
played a major role in shaping our current perception, starting with a
[popular blog about trends in the English
web](http://japan.cnet.com/blog/umeda/) in 2003. His influence extended to the
general public when he published [“Web Shinkaron” (”Theory of Web
Evolution”)](http://www.lifestudies.org/weblog/2006/02/theory_of_web_evolution_web_20.html)
in 2006, and took on the role of educator and evangelist for Web 2.0.
[@tsuda](http://www.twitter.com/tsuda/) tweeted:

>
> 『ウェブ進化論』の凄さは、一見最新のネット事情をわかりやすく説明する「解説書」の体裁を取っていながら、物心ついたときからネットが側にある若者に対して「既得権益層を潰しちゃえよ！」というメッセージを発信していたところにある。

The brilliance of ‘Web Shinkaron’ is that while taking the shape of a
‘practical guide to the web’, the book actually transmits the message “Break
down the establishment!” to young people who've had the Internet at their side
since childhood.

In this context, much of the initial reactions to the interview were heated
analysis of Umeda himself and included quite a few personal attacks that
emphasized his lack of awareness of the responsibility that comes from being
in an influential and public position. For example, [Takayuki
Fukatsu](http://fladdict.net/blog/2009/06/hatena-zannen.html), after
underscoring that it was Hatena who failed at making inroads into the U.S.
market, commented on his blog:

>
> 「Web進化論」みたいな、宗教的なカリスマになったからには、衆民にご利益と実績を示し続けないと、宗教は機能しないと思うんよ。煽ってムーブメントを作り出したからには、梅田さんなり、はてななりがそれを実践しないと、「あぁ、あの人の言っていたことは机上の空論だったのだなぁ」と、逆にみんなそれを諦めちゃうんじゃないかと。それが、「web進化論的なるものは日本では失敗する」っていう共通認識が、いまのwebのがっかり感の基盤なんじゃないかなと。煽るだけ煽ってリタイアしながら、日本のwebが「残念」とか言われても、どうしろというのかと。

Since Mr. Umeda gained cult-like status for ‘Web Shinkaron’, he's obligated to
continue bestowing boons and displaying accomplishments to the public, or else
the ‘religion’ will stop functioning. He's the one that fanned the flames and
started the movement; therefore Mr. Umeda or Hatena must carry out the vision,
or else people will give up and say “Oh, he was nothing but talk.” The common
perception “The world from Web Shinkaron will fail in Japan” is the basis for
this disappointment that we share. What are we to do? He's fanned the flames
all he likes and retired, and yet calls the Japanese web a ‘disappointment’.

As Umeda predicted, many people pointed a finger at Hatena as the reason for
the current state of the Japanese web, with varying degrees of opinion on how
‘disappointing’ it is. Economist [Nobuo
Ikeda](http://blog.goo.ne.jp/ikedanobuo/e/54f043773c73f9c44acde62c00573094)
focused on the part about how the web has not developed beyond the realm of
subculture:

>
> この「残念」な状況を作り出した大きな原因は、はてなである。梅田氏が「バカなコメントが多い」といったように、実名の生産的な批判より匿名の悪罵のほうが圧倒的に多いことが「上の人」を萎縮させ、日本のウェブのレベルを下げているのだ。その結果、アメリカのブログは著名人が既存メディアの枠を超えてリアルタイムで議論する場になり、大手メディアに対抗する存在になりつつあるのに、彼も嘆くように日本のブログはますます劣化している。
>
> [….]
>
>
> 日本をだめにしているのは、このような日本企業の家父長的な構造と、それにチャレンジしないでストレスを飲み屋やウェブで発散するサラリーマンだ。はてなは結果的には、こうした卑怯者に「ガス抜き」のプラットフォームを提供することによって、この救いのない（梅田氏も嫌悪する）システムを延命する役割を果たしている。このアーキテクチャを個人が変えることはできないが、はてなの取締役である梅田氏には現状を改善する意思決定は可能だ。それをしないで他人事のように「残念」というのは、加害者の開き直りにしか見えない。

One big catalyst for this ‘disappointing’ situation is Hatena itself. Like Mr.
Umeda's comment that “there are many stupid comments”, the fact that anonymous
bashing is more pervasive than constrictive criticism under real names have
made the ‘higher ups’ shy away and subsequently lowered the level of the
Japanese web. As a result, the American blogosphere has become a place for
real-time discussions by prominent figures that go beyond the borders of the
existing media. Meanwhile the Japanese blogosphere, like he despairs,
continues to deteriorate.

