[![](https://globalvoices.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/11/Screen-
Shot-2018-11-13-at-8.27.44-PM.png)](https://www.flickr.com/photos/presidentialoffice/31033097412/sizes/h/)

Tsai Ing-wen, Taiwan's first female president. Photo by Taiwan Presidential
Office via Flickr (CC BY 2.0).

Since 2016, when Tsai Ing-wen of the Democratic Progressive Party (DPP) was
elected as Taiwan's president after the [pro-independent Sunflower
Movement](https://www.bbc.com/news/world-asia-32157210), waves of
disinformation have engulfed traditional and social media platforms in Taiwan
— and much of it can be traced back to China.

Taiwan has been ruled independently for decades, and Tsai decided to reject
the [“One China, different
interpretation”,](https://www.straitstimes.com/asia/east-asia/tsai-rejects-
deadline-over-1992-consensus) an agreement signed in 1992 between the former
ruling Kuomingtang and Beijing that helped improve the strained relationship
between Taiwan and the People's Republic of China.

Since Tsai's decision, that relationship has taken a turn for the worse.
Beijing has [suspended
diplomatic](https://www.nytimes.com/2016/06/26/world/asia/china-suspends-
diplomatic-contact-with-taiwan.html) contact with Taiwan, imposed [economic
sanctions](https://www.straitstimes.com/asia/east-asia/us-concerned-about-
chinas-pressures-on-taiwan-and-in-south-china-sea-defence-official), forced
other countries to cut[ ties with
Taiwan](https://www.scmp.com/news/china/diplomacy-defence/article/2160595/el-
salvador-cuts-taiwan-links-island-loses-yet-another) and has bolstered its
[military presence](https://www.reuters.com/article/us-taiwan-defence-
exclusive-idUSKBN16M0CB) in the Taiwan Strait.

In parallel, a series of fake news campaigns have captured Taiwanese media,
with experts tracing several of these stories back to China.

Last year, Taiwan’s National Security Bureau [revealed
that](https://jamestown.org/program/ccp-propaganda-against-taiwan-enters-the-
social-age/) a significant volume of disinformation that had circulated on
Taiwan social media networks came from “content farms” with China's Communist
Party. This was [confirmed a few months
ago](http://www.taipeitimes.com/News/front/archives/2018/09/16/2003700513) by
the Investigative Bureau of Taiwan's Ministry of Justice.

Various media outlets, including Chinese dissident media outlet
[Mingjing](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=T6a6x04tYhE), referred to a leaked
document from Chinese authorities affirming that Beijing had launched an
information war, using disinformation, online harassment and trolling
campaigns to manipulate public opinions in Taiwan.

Taiwanese media outlet [Mirror Media also
referred](https://www.mirrormedia.mg/story/20181024inv004/?fbclid=IwAR0XTdN08TEaDd7UMJCMCfC1P83zjFSloxUBaxeCmW)
to the leaked document, concluding that Beijing's objective is to divide
Taiwanese society.

Technical research has also supported these reports. Programmers who run a
fact-checking bot in an application called the LINE app, a messaging platform
hugely popular in Taiwan, told Taiwanese online magazine [ Business
Weekly](https://www.businessweekly.com.tw/magazine/Article_mag_page.aspx?id=64444)
that at least 20 percent of the disinformation sent to them comes from China.

### **Rumors target the president**

Many of these rumors and fake news target the personal life of Tsai. Soon
after her 2016 election victory, a fabricated story was posted [on
Reddit](https://www.reddit.com/r/funny/comments/42odrd/wish_i_could_use_this_line/)
and quickly became one of the hottest topics in Taiwanese media. The story
falsely claims that when Tsai was asked why she never married, she replied: “I
wouldn’t buy a whole pig just so I could have a sausage.”

Eventually, Reddit users found out that the image came from various Chinese
online forums like Tianya and had first appeared in 2011 when Tsai first ran
for president. Around 2016, a journalist from Gizmodo reached out to the
Taipei Economic and Cultural Office who
[confirmed](https://www.reddit.com/r/funny/comments/42odrd/wish_i_could_use_this_line/)
this quote was false.

[![](https://globalvoices.org/wp-
content/uploads/2018/11/tsai_single-800x515.png)](https://gizmodo.com/9-more-
viral-photos-that-are-completely-fake-1754282672)

Tsai, the Taiwanese president, is the subject of a viral fake news campaign,
identified as fake by Gizmodo.

Although this fabricated story had circulated widely in China and became a hot
topic on Reddit, it was never really taken seriously in Taiwan as it cuts
against Taiwanese mainstream values.

But others have gained more ground. Also in 2016, a rumor that Tsai was of
[Japanese descent](https://disp.cc/b/163-9BRm) circulated on Facebook. This
piece of disinformation first appeared on
[Tianya](http://bbs.tianya.cn/post-333-909947-1.shtml) in 2015 and it
reappeared on [Taiwan's social
media](http://news.ltn.com.tw/news/politics/paper/1188901) in 2016. The rumor
triggers memories of the Japanese 1885-1945 colonial era — those Taiwanese who
were educated to recognize themselves as Chinese see Japan, and its once-
colonized Taiwan, as an enemy from World War II.

A similar example is a piece of [fabricated news
](https://www.mygopen.com/2018/09/line200010050.html)that 2,000 important art
pieces in the National Palace Museum in Taiwan will be sent to Japan for a
50-year exhibition contract, which circulated in July 2018.

In addition to President Tsai Ing-wen, other DPP politicians have also become
targets of disinformation.

### Fake news takes a fatal turn

![](https://globalvoices.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/09/consulate-800x511.png)

Screenshot from a viral video showing a Chinese representative from the
Chinese consulate in Osaka, Japan, explaining evacuation efforts to stranded
Chinese tourists during Typhoon Jebi in September 2018.

In September, when Typhoon Jebi struck Japan's Kansai region, a story that
undermined senior DPP member and Taiwan’s ambassador in Japan, Frank Hsieh,
triggered a chaotic chain of events that culminated in the death by suicide of
a Taiwanese diplomat stationed in Osaka.

Propaganda from several [state-affiliated media
outlets](https://www.guancha.cn/internation/2018_09_05_470949.shtml) in China
claimed that the Chinese consulate in Osaka had arranged evacuation buses from
Kansai airport exclusively for stranded Chinese tourists. Some reports claimed
that Taiwanese people were required to identify themselves as Chinese in order
to get on the buses.

In fact, the buses had been arranged by Japanese authorities. As this
clarification traveled much slower than the fake story itself, Taiwanese
traditional media, along with [internet
celebrities](https://www.chinatimes.com/realtimenews/20180907001922-260407),
had time to cook the story and made the impression that many people demanded
Frank Hsieh to step down for not providing adequate assistance to Taiwanese
tourists during the disaster. Amid the furor, Taiwanese diplomat Su Chii-
Cherng [died](http://focustaiwan.tw/news/aipl/201809140014.aspx) by suicide.
Japanese media [reported](https://toyokeizai.net/articles/-/238262) that Su
suffered from criticism due to disinformation.

Later, it was discovered that much of the related social media content
churning the fake story [came from
Beijing](https://www.ptt.cc/bbs/Gossiping/M.1537113812.A.DA8.html).

Disinformation continues to follow Frank Hsieh. In a fabricated photo that
circulated recently, a screenshot of a TV interview by Hsieh [was
doctored](http://news.ltn.com.tw/news/politics/breakingnews/2553239) to
include the quotes: ‘until all staff in the Osaka office die, I will not
resign.’ As the font used in the lower banner can only be found in the
Simplified Chinese version of Microsoft Word, the fabrication is believed to
be done in mainland China.

[![](https://globalvoices.org/wp-
content/uploads/2018/11/frankhsieh.jpg)](http://news.ltn.com.tw/news/politics/breakingnews/2553239)

A fake photo with changed words in the lower banner.

### Disinformation on trade and pineapples

Other fabricated news stories target DPP's China policy. A photo showing
pineapples dumped in a dam has circulated widely in Taiwan that came with [a
message](https://www.mygopen.com/2018/05/blog-post_24.html):

> After DPP became the ruling party, our government becomes impotent. Now
> China refuses to buy fruits from ‘independent’ Taiwan. The farmers work hard
> for nothing. It is so sad.

Though the Council of Agriculture pointed out that [this photo was taken in
China](https://kknews.cc/zh-tw/agriculture/6labpkm.html) and not Taiwan, its
circulation has successfully drawn a correlation between the drop in pineapple
sales and DPP's China policy, as reflected in the [farmer protest in
Taipei](https://www.storm.mg/article/458087) in July.

[![](https://globalvoices.org/wp-
content/uploads/2018/11/pineapple.jpg)](https://zi.media/@wwwmygopencom/post/j5GcuS)

A photo showing pineapples dumped in a dam has circulated widely in Taiwan
that came with a false message. The photo was actually taken in China, not
Taiwan.

### **Social media's helping hand**

In Taiwan, the popularity of bulletin board systems (BBS) and closed-group
messaging apps like LINE have fueled the spread of disinformation.

BBS, a platform style popular in the 1990s, still plays an important role in
distributing information in Taiwan.
[PTT](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/PTT_Bulletin_Board_System), the biggest
and most influential bulletin board system, operates as a non-commercial and
open-source platform similar to Reddit with more than 1.5 million registered
users. Over 150,000 users are online during peak hours, and more than 20,000
articles and 500,000 comments are posted every day, according to Wikipedia.
Some consider PTT a hotbed for rumors and, to combat them, its engineers have
been testing and adjusting the platform's algorithms.

[LINE is the most
popular](https://www.chinatimes.com/realtimenews/20181008001408-260410)
messaging platform in Taiwan and, like WhatsApp, people use it to share
information via closed groups. Recently, a coalition of civic tech
organizations developed a [bot](https://g0v.news/killing-fake-news-dead-on-
taiwans-most-popular-messaging-app-c99d93582cbe) to fight disinformation on
LINE, but most users tend to believe the information they receive because it
typically comes from trusted family and friends.

These cases demonstrate Taiwan's vulnerability to disinformation generated in
China. Understanding how to defend freedom of expression and safeguard
Taiwanese people from being manipulated by systemic disinformation attacks has
become a crucial item in the public agenda.

