![japan fireworks](https://globalvoices.org/wp-
content/uploads/2018/08/IMG_20170816_195309-800x533.jpg)

August fireworks at Matsubara beach in Tsuruga, Fukui, Japan. Photo by Nevin
Thompson, used with permission.

The summer months of July and August in Japan are famed for their fireworks,
known as ‘hanabi’ (花火) in Japanese. The term comes from the Japanese words for
‘flower’ and ‘fire’ combined and fireworks displayed in Japan are famed for
their [artistic mastery](http://thechromologist.com/art-japanese-fireworks/).

Fireworks are thought to have been [first introduced to Japan by Dutch
traders](https://www.researchonline.mq.edu.au/vital/access/services/Download/mq:9447/DS01?view=true)
nearly 500 years ago. Today, [hundreds of fireworks
festivals](https://www.japan-guide.com/e/e2267.html) are held in communities
large and small across Japan, typically on riverbanks or beaches. As August
wraps up and fall arrives, here is a look back at some of Japan's most
memorable ‘hanabi’ festivals from the past two months:

### Natsu Ichiban Hanabi Festival (Huis Ten Bosch amusement park, Nagasaki)

> [A post shared by 梁井和樹
> (@yanakazu0119)](https://www.instagram.com/p/BlhW5u-AfbO/?utm_source=ig_embed)
> on Jul 21, 2018 at 9:52pm PDT

Modeled after a traditional Dutch town, [Huis Ten
Bosch](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Huis_Ten_Bosch_\(theme_park\)) is a
popular theme park and resort in Nagasaki, on the island of Kyushu. Larger
than [Tokyo Disney Resort](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tokyo_Disney_Resort),
Huis Ten Bosch is the biggest theme park in Japan, where visitors can enjoy
summer fireworks while taking a dip in a giant swimming pool.

In the summer, the ‘hanabi’ at Huis Ten Bosch include an exhibition by the
winners of famed fireworks competitions held each year at the theme park
[Hanabi World Cup](https://digjapan.travel/en/spot/id=10994).

### Ashiya Summer Carnival (Ashiya, Hyogo)

> [A post shared by 路 るう（19）
> (@lll_photo_)](https://www.instagram.com/p/Blh6tN9ACoS/?utm_source=ig_embed)
> on Jul 22, 2018 at 3:05am PDT

Located near the port city of Kobe in western Japan, the [Ashiya Summer
Carnival](http://www.nihon-
kankou.or.jp.e.wp.hp.transer.com/detail/28206ba2210127318) celebrated its
fortieth anniversary this year with a unique ‘hanabi’ show.

Computers orchestrate all the music and fireworks in this show. For this
year's anniversary, famed jazz pianist [Takashi
Matsunaga](https://www.allmusic.com/album/storm-zone-mw0000326991) performed
alongside the fireworks.

### Tenjin Festival (Osaka Tenmangu Shrine)

> [A post shared by UR Osaka
> (@urambassador)](https://www.instagram.com/p/BlcikisH9XE/?utm_source=ig_embed)
> on Jul 20, 2018 at 12:58am PDT

The thousand-year-old [Tenjin Festival,](https://us.jnto.go.jp/blog/tenjin-
matsuri-festival-of-the-gods/) dedicated to Sugawara Michizane (the god of
scholarship and learning), occurs between June and July every year and
features a variety of events. As one of the most famous festivals in Japan,
many people travel to the Okawa River in Osaka to see the Hommiya fireworks
display on July 25, as seen above.

The Tenjin Festival takes place in Kansai, the large urban area in western
Japan that feature a cluster of large cities including Osaka, Kyoto and Kobe.

### The songs of ‘hanabi’

Large fireworks displays in the night skies are usually referred to as
‘uchiage hanabi’ (打ち上げ花火, literally “fireworks”) and they play a big role in
Japanese culture, appearing frequently in songs. The 2017 animated movie
‘[Fireworks](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fireworks_\(2017_film\))‘
([打ち上げ花火](http://uchiagehanabi.jp/)、下から見るか? 横から見るか? _Uchiage Hanabi, Shita
kara Miru ka? Yoko kara Miru ka?)_ demonstrates the centrality of fireworks to
Japanese culture:

Beyond ‘uchiage hanabi’, another type of fireworks common in Japan is ‘senko
hanabi’ ( 線香花火) or sparklers (“Senko” means “incense sticks” in Japanese). On
summer evenings, children typically play with senko sticks outside, purchasing
bag-loads sold at summer festivals.

The pop song “Senko Hanabi” depicts what a hot summer evening in Japan looks
like:

