[![](https://es.globalvoices.org/wp-
content/uploads/2017/10/Cataluña-800x450.jpg)](https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Via_Catalana_per_la_independencia_Figueres_2013_\(17\).JPG)

“Catalan flag in Figueres”. Photo by Kippelboy via Wikipedia. CC BY 3.0

**_The following is an edited version of an article written by[Irina Illa
Pueyo](https://afrofeminas.com/?s=irina+illa) for Afroféminas about the
debates for [Catalonia's
independence](https://globalvoices.org/2017/10/10/beyond-the-yes-and-no-of-
catalonias-independence-referendum/). _**

“Without migrants, there is no revolution,” was one of the slogans chanted at
the demonstration on October 3 in Barcelona. We were a considerable crowd,
judging from the chants emanating from various megaphones.

Words like “woman”, “grandmothers”, “people”, “workers”, “proletariat”, “anti-
capitalism”, “anti-fascism”, “independence” were mostly cheered on, but when
it came time for the word “migrants”, we found ourselves alone. Megaphone in
hand, we mustered all our breath in order to raise the tone, but of the five
senses that every human being possesses, the only ones that responded to that
word at that moment were ears and a few big, astonished eyes. It seemed like
that term was unknown or, better yet, that those present were not prepared to
include, even symbolically, it in this group.

I was greatly surprised that young people sporting dreadlocks, turbans,
braids, and other Afrocentric apparel failed to acknowledge the word “migrant”
at an event in support of those being persecuted in Catalonia: its residents.
Even more surprising was that during the break between the morning and
afternoon demonstrations, many people went off to eat kebabs—the most popular
fast food in many European cities—which originated in the Middle East. In
other words, while it's convenient to eat at a kebab restaurant run by
migrants, there's no interest in relating to them or including them in the
cause. It also surprised me that the same people who with the dreadlocks,
braids, and turbans would buy _esteladas_ , the Catalan flags most commonly
seen at demonstrations in favor of independence, manufactured by the hands of
exploited migrants in China.

At the school where I work, a girl told me that her mother, who is Bolivian,
had been beaten for going to work. A migrant woman is beaten for going to work
and not supporting the strike against police brutality, but she is not even
allowed to vote. When she comes out to march against police brutality, the
white community will barely be present.

It seems as though the issue of migration is always a step behind the white
community's concerns, in the shadows like a simple prop, carrying out
exhausting manual labor to facilitate white intellectuals, and allow them to
think.

There's a general reluctance to listen to migrants in environments that are
not exclusively racialized, because theory seems to be a white thing, while
experience and victimization are migrant things. We need to start considering
the presence of migrants in all types of spaces as something normal, not as a
threat to the homogeneity of thought and culture.

