![](https://globalvoices.org/wp-
content/uploads/2017/11/Rainbow_flag_and_blue_skies-800x532.jpg)

[Ludovic Bertron](https://www.flickr.com/photos/23912576@N05/2942525739) from
New York City, USA. CC BY 2.0.

**_The following is a[partner post ](http://www.eurasianet.org/node/85856)from
[EurasiaNet.org](http://www.eurasianet.org/) written by [Giorgi
Lomsadze](http://www.eurasianet.org/taxonomy/term/2399). Republished with
permission._**

[Georgian soccer player Guram Kashia](https://www.rferl.org/a/georgia-
football-guram-kashia-lgbt-rainbow-homosexuality-discrimination/28806434.html)
faces an outcry at home over his choice to express support for gay rights in
the Netherlands, but support from Georgian fans, athletes and politicians,
including [Tbilisi Mayor-Elect Kakha
Kaladze](http://www.eurasianet.org/node/85671), Georgia’s most famous soccer
player, suggest that local views on this prickliest of cultural issues may be
changing.

After Kashia, a 30-year-old defender for the Dutch team [Vitesse
Arnhem](https://www.vitesse.nl/nl/eersteelftal/speler/22), appeared with a
rainbow armband at an October 15 match in the Netherlands, Georgian social
media erupted in vitriol. The March of Georgians, a far-right group, held a
rowdy gathering near the Georgian Football Federation on October 31. Holding
torches and posters, they demanded Kashia’s expulsion from Georgia’s national
soccer team.

Leading the battle was the large, flamboyant singer [Gia
Korkotashvili](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=zEIhTtwNd0g), aka Korkota, a
self-proclaimed warrior for traditional values who appeared on TV screaming
prophecies of an imminent gay apocalypse. “Just wait and you will see when
homosexuals come bursting into your homes,” he told [Georgian TV channels
](https://www.kvirispalitra.ge/public/37868-qsul-500-kaci-rom-movida-imitom-
dagvitcires-akhla-nakhavth-homoseqsualebi-sakhlshi-rom-shemogivardebianq-ra-
mokhda-qqarthuli-marshisq-aqciaze.html)from the rally.

In a country where homosexuality has long been frowned upon, such outpourings
are par for the course. But widespread, vocal expressions of support against
discrimination are something new.

If advocacy for LGBT rights has been the preserve of a small circle of
activists and progressives, now many, from President Giorgi Margvelashvili to
prominent Georgian athletes and individual fans, have spoken up for Kashia and
for universal respect for equality.

“Kashia stated that all human beings, regardless of their sexual persuasion,
are regular members of our society and it is inadmissible to discriminate them
based on whatever differences they may have,” said [Zviad
Sichinava](https://metronome.ge/%E1%83%9B%E1%83%AE%E1%83%90%E1%83%A0%E1%83%93%E1%83%90%E1%83%AD%E1%83%94%E1%83%A0%E1%83%90-%E1%83%93%E1%83%90-%E1%83%99%E1%83%A0%E1%83%98%E1%83%A2%E1%83%98%E1%83%99%E1%83%90-%E1%83%95%E1%83%98/),
a retired longtime president of the Georgian Football Federation. The current
president of the Federation, [Levan
Kobiashvili](https://www.facebook.com/LevanKobiashviliofficial/), an MP for
the ruling Georgian Dream party, and other supporters posted on Facebook a
photo of Kashia draped in the Georgian flag that went viral.

“We are a democratic country. Everyone has the right to express their views,
regardless of their nationality, sexual orientation or religion,” said
[Tbilisi Mayor-Elect Kaladze](http://netgazeti.ge/slideshow/228144/), a former
AC Milan star and captain of Georgia’s national soccer team.

The government also appears to have drawn a line for acceptable conduct at
anti-LGBT protests. Police failed to prevent [a mob attack on an LGBT-rights
rally in 2013](http://www.eurasianet.org/node/66983), but, this time, police
confronted and arrested eight March of Georgians activists when their
gathering got out of hand. The leaders of the rally, including Korkota,
expressed disappointment at the turnout of supporters.

Korkota and his comrades long have claimed ownership of Georgian cultural
identity, a collection of character traits and traditions often defined as
_kartveloba_ or “Georgianness.” Earlier this year, they rallied [against
immigrants from the Middle East.](http://www.eurasianet.org/node/84376) The
Korkota group’s racist and misogynist statements antagonized
[many.](http://www.eurasianet.org/node/84451)

Georgia’s liberals have accused the ruling Georgian Dream of pandering to such
right-wing views by[ outlawing foreign ownership of agricultural land
](http://www.eurasianet.org/node/85736)and constitutionally defining marriage
as a union between a man and a woman.

The Kashia episode now appears to have placed the authorities and the ultra-
conservatives in opposing camps.

The overall response to the athlete’s armband has left some in Georgia’s
largely closeted LGBT community guardedly optimistic about their acceptance
within Georgian society. “We are far from getting there, but I see change,”
one Tbilisi resident commented to EurasiaNet.org.

