[![Screen capture: Walt Disney, "Der Fuehrer's Face" \(1942\) /
YouTube](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-content/uploads/2015/09/Screen-
Shot-2015-09-06-at-1.23.10-PM-800x540.png)](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=PL8FxDhsfhs)

Screen capture: Walt Disney, “Der Fuehrer's Face” (1942) / YouTube

Two men in Tomsk have been [convicted](https://tjournal.ru/p/donald-dag) of
disseminating illegal extremist materials online, for uploading some songs by
a white supremacist band, as well as a Walt Disney anti-fascist cartoon from
1942, [_Der Fuehrer’s Face_](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=bn20oXFrxxg) ,
which stars Donald Duck and
[won](https://www.oscars.org/oscars/ceremonies/1943) the Academy Award for
cartoon short that same year.

Both men
[confessed](http://seversky.tms.sudrf.ru/modules.php?name=sud_delo&srv_num=1&name_op=doc&number=11280566&delo_id=1500001&new=&text_number=1)
to the crime and [expressed
remorse](http://seversky.tms.sudrf.ru/modules.php?name=sud_delo&srv_num=1&name_op=doc&number=11280582&delo_id=1500001&new=&text_number=1),
claiming they’d shared the materials as a joke during the summer of 2013. The
judge fined them both 3,000 rubles (about $40), and declined to sentence them
to 15 days in jail, which is the maximum penalty for the production and
dissemination of extremist materials under Russian Administrative Code 20.29.

The Donald Duck cartoon has been banned in Russia since December 2010, when a
Kamchatka court added it to the national list of illegal extremist materials,
along with [dozens of other racist video
clips](http://minjust.ru/ru/extremist-
materials?field_extremist_content_value=%D0%B4%D0%BE%D0%BD%D0%B0%D0%BB%D1%8C%D0%B4)
found to have been shared by a man named Sergey Semenov. (Tomsk prosecutors,
incidentally, [transliterated](http://prokuratura.tomsk.gov.ru/news/3439.html)
Donald Duck’s name differently than the spelling found on the federal list of
extremist materials, making it seem technically as if the two cartoons are
actually different films.)

[![Screen Shot 2015-09-06 at 1.25.17 PM](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2015/09/Screen-
Shot-2015-09-06-at-1.25.17-PM-800x507.png)](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=PL8FxDhsfhs)

A racist depiction of the “Japanese enemy.” Screen capture: Walt Disney, “Der
Fuehrer's Face” (1942) / YouTube

According to Sova, a Moscow-based hate crimes watchdog organization, that the
Disney cartoon was banned along with Semenov’s other materials is proof that
the authorities didn’t actually watch each video in Semenov’s collection,
before banning them all. “This incident,” says a [statement](http://www.sova-
center.ru/misuse/news/persecution/2015/09/d32717/) on Sova’s website, “once
again demonstrates the uselessness and even the danger of the federal list as
an instrument and reminds us that the best solution would be to get rid of it
altogether.”

_Der Fuehrer’s Face_ features Donald Duck living in a fascist dictatorship,
where he’s ordered about at gunpoint and set to work assembling bombs on a
factory line. Under threat of execution, he is forced to salute every portrait
of Adolf Hilter he encounters. The cartoon also features a racist depiction of
the Japanese, in keeping with America’s wartime propaganda efforts on two
fronts. In the end of the film, Donald Duck awakens to realize that it was all
a dream, and he is in fact living in the United States. Embracing a miniature
of the Statue of Liberty, Donald speaks his final line: “Am I glad to be a
citizen of the United States of America!”

