[![ Faces of participants of the No Muslim Ban protest at Lafayette Park, in
Washington D.C., January 29, 2017. Photos: Ivan
Sigal](https://globalvoices.org/wp-content/uploads/2017/01/Protest-
portraits_2017_3.jpg)](https://globalvoices.org/wp-
content/uploads/2017/01/Protest-portraits_2017_3.jpg)

Faces of participants of the No Muslim Ban protest at Lafayette Park, in
Washington D.C., January 29, 2017. Photos: Ivan Sigal

The residents of Washington D.C. came out of their houses and apartments last
Sunday morning. They walked, biked and took buses down to Lafayette Square, in
front of the White House, for a spontaneous demonstration, in tandem with
other protests across the United States against Trump's [Executive
Order](http://www.cnn.com/2017/01/28/politics/text-of-trump-executive-order-
nation-ban-refugees/) banning entry to the U.S. for immigrants, visa holders
and refugees from seven countries.

Perhaps 5,000 people, seemingly unaccustomed to protest. In a tightly-packed
space between left-over fencing from the previous weekend's Presidential
inauguration, the event began with the same improvised spirit in which it was
organized—through a [Facebook
page](https://www.facebook.com/events/1252785808141697/), then rippling across
social media into the flesh-and-blood world.

In the absence of a stage or a clear leader, people in the crowd looked to
each other for cues. They were less a mobilized march than a collection of
individuals deciding, on the spot, how they should behave. Here were people
coming out of their social media shells, out of communities defined by work or
school and into a fully public civic space. There were rumors that political
leaders attended, but they were not visible or audible from any of the
vantages I achieved. Instead, people negotiated with others nearby, for space,
for direction. And perhaps because this crowd was not united by any organizing
principle other than the need to demonstrate resistance, those negotiations
took place mostly in silence, with looks and nods and occasional gestures.

[![ Faces of participants of the No Muslim Ban protest at Lafayette Park, in
Washington D.C., January 29, 2017. Photos: Ivan
Sigal](https://globalvoices.org/wp-content/uploads/2017/01/Protest-
portraits_2017_2-600x600.jpg)](https://globalvoices.org/wp-
content/uploads/2017/01/Protest-portraits_2017_2.jpg)

Faces of participants of the No Muslim Ban protest at Lafayette Park, in
Washington D.C., January 29, 2017. Photos: Ivan Sigal

Perhaps they were angry, or determined, but the chants and calls of “Shame”,
“No ban, no wall” and “No hate, no fear, refugees are welcome here” rose in
restive pockets within the crowd, never reaching a volume or pitch that could
be mistaken for aggression. As the crowd packed into the space from the rear,
some took the initiative to announce a march along Pennsylvania Avenue, to the
Trump International Hotel, and then onward to the Capitol. The jam broke, and
we started moving.

[![ Faces of participants of the No Muslim Ban protest at Lafayette Park, in
Washington D.C., January 29, 2017. Photos: Ivan
Sigal](https://globalvoices.org/wp-content/uploads/2017/01/Protest-
portraits_2017_1-600x600.jpg)](https://globalvoices.org/wp-
content/uploads/2017/01/Protest-portraits_2017_1.jpg)

Faces of participants of the No Muslim Ban protest at Lafayette Park, in
Washington D.C., January 29, 2017. Photos: Ivan Sigal

