[![Vietnamese elders will react in horror if you ever stick your chopsticks
upright into your rice bowl. Photo from the Flickr page of Quinn Dombrowski,
CC License.](https://globalvoices.org/wp-
content/uploads/2016/11/5531071061_47946a52d4_b.jpg)](https://www.flickr.com/photos/quinnanya/5531071061/in/photolist-
pz8zZm-4qq893-4Cn2DZ-5QLTK2-7FCiZn-pm5HN-r9iU1b-5pSDF1-53by8e-4o828X-bwZdoL-
viVWg-7p2Kxq-bsZzop-a3AF2q-EfxBr-aAfJgq-
wJAZc4-9bXwNA-9qLbJa-2bDi2J-5Kyhj6-x1m64w-4Amg4V-VEcAT-GS4KzF-aBD5Ju)

Vietnamese elders will react in horror if you ever stick your chopsticks
upright into your rice bowl. Photo from the Flickr page of Quinn Dombrowski,
CC License.

_This[article](http://www.loa.fm/post/137184162823/loa-why-you-shouldnt-stick-
your-chopsticks-in) by Vinh Trần is from Loa, an independent news website and
podcast that broadcasts stories about Vietnam, and is republished by Global
Voices as part of a content-sharing agreement._

Ever gotten a slap on the hand when you stick your chopsticks upright into
your rice bowl in Vietnam? What’s up with that? Let’s explore this and other
popular Vietnamese superstitions.

### **1\. The Black Cat**

Black cats are a bad omen in many parts of the world, but for the Vietnamese,
the bad luck happens when the cat comes into your house.

We got the lowdown from Professor Hoàng Mai Nguyễn.

Professor Nguyễn says that this superstition is rooted in the belief that when
someone passes away and a cat enters the home and jumps over the coffin, the
deceased person might sit right up. Apparently, this came from a story passed
down through the generations without scientific evidence. But since no one
wants that to happen, people will do everything to prevent this situation from
happening.

### **2\. No Odd-Numbered Groups in Photos**

Ever been to a Vietnamese wedding and notice that if there’s an odd number of
people gathering to pose for a photo, another person will jump into the mix?
Well, here’s the “logic” behind that.

According to Vietnamese superstition, the person in the middle of an odd-
numbered group photo will be the first to die. Specifically, when there are
only three people in the picture, the person in the middle could be the first
one to die, and if he or she does not die, then all three people will receive
bad luck.

Again, no scientific evidence, but… who wants to risk it?

### **3\. Chopsticks Upright in the Rice Bowl**

Vietnamese elders will react in horror if you ever stick your chopsticks
upright into your rice bowl. What gives?

Some say it’s because it resembles an incense bowl (with the chopsticks as the
incense).

Professor Nguyễn says it’s not so much that an incense bowl is bad luck, but
because it is so often used during ceremonies commemorating the deceased, it
is often associated with a death in the family. She says there’s no proof of
bad luck occurring because of this, but a student named Lan Bùi says she
avoids positioning her chopsticks this way out of respect.

> I don’t personally know if the superstition can bring misfortune but I still
> avoid it because I consider it as bad manners. It’s a kind of a form of
> respect for me.

You now have a brief breakdown of three popular Vietnamese superstitions.
Whether it’s out of respect or to avoid risking bad luck, perhaps you can now
make a slightly more informed choice on whether or not to adhere to the
superstitions.

Learn more about Vietnamese superstitions by listening to this podcast:

