[![Photo by Flickr user rick. CC BY 2.0](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2015/02/525988813_f3d118a8f6_b-800x600.jpg)](https://www.flickr.com/photos/spine/525988813/in/photolist-6f9K9W-fr5qN-4ptCoT-
fr5m5-5EvRRX-ng2MMX-NtQ9D-ng52Ys-fr5km-2vBmm5-hByp6-nfXqDS-8cCQY-ng3fun-
dhkGGw-4xptav-ng2WQ6-6f9FEW-8ApgMy-
fr5f3-q3DVD-4pxEeo-6FJ9y6-aLPVEM-2SkDVT-6fwG1d-6FNcFL-
fr5fP-7Mj795-7Mj7hw-7Mj7DG-8UykdQ-7MfafB-fr5hv-dPjTs2-fr5od-6fwFWY-6fwFTu-
pe7d1A-4u3F4D-7Mj7y9-7Mj7vm-7Mj6u5-7Mj7Bs-7Mj7mW-7Mfacx-7Mj6PC-7Mf9Xp-7Mf9vt-7Mf9ct)

Photo by Flickr user rick. CC BY 2.0

_This article and a radio report by[Monica
Campbell](http://www.pri.org/people/monica-campbell) for [The
World](http://www.pri.org/programs/the-world) originally [appeared on
PRI.org](http://www.pri.org/stories/2015-02-04/how-produce-aisle-looks-
migrant-farmworker) on February 4, 2015 and is republished as part of a
content-sharing agreement._

In the produce aisle of a supermarket in Madera, in California’s rural Central
Valley, Francisco surveys the fruits and vegetables on display in the produce
aisle. He’s 40 years old and stocky. He's also undocumented, and he asks to
use his first name only.

For years, he’s picked produce in Mexico and along the West Coast of the
United States. He’s good at it, but there’s one thing on display here that he
wouldn’t mind never harvesting again: the tomato.

It's the crop that “leaves you the most tired,” he says. The tomatoes are
heavy and you have to squat all day to pick them. You also have to inspect
each tomato to make sure the color is even. It’s hard to work fast.

Plus, they’re messy. “Oh man, you leave the fields dirty. The tomato’s green
leaves stain everything and it’s muddy work,” Francisco says.

Then there’s the avocado — also tough. Francisco picked them in Mexico. When
he looks at them, he thinks heavy but delicate.

“You have to make sure you pick them at just the right time, when they’re not
too mature or too ripe,” he says. “And if you drop them, they’re ruined, even
if they still look good on the ground.”

He remembers how much the avocados weigh once they fill up the picker’s bag
that's harnessed around the shoulders — a full bag is about 50 pounds. And
once it's filled, you then have to lean over slowly, dropping the avocados in
the bin without damaging them.

Next, Francisco spots the onions, white and smooth.

“The onion is complicated because you have to hunch down, digging them up from
the ground,” he says. You must also remove the onion’s beard, or _l_ _a
barba_. “It’s that dark stringy part at the top of the onion,” he says. “We
use small clippers to take them off, and you have to be careful not to damage
the onion. It’s repetitive and leaves your hands sore. I would exercise my
fingers at night to make sure that my hands would be ready to work the next
day.”

Which would he rather work with — the avocado or the onion?

“The avocado,” he says right away. He’d rather be on a ladder all day than
squatting on the ground between rows of crops. But a fall off the ladder — up
to 30 feet high — can be serious. ** _  
_**

Then Francisco sees what he really wants to talk about: strawberries. He has
mixed feelings about them.

He says the tricky part is to remove the strawberry’s stem and leaves without
damaging the berries. And each piece of fruit must be inspected to make sure
it’s not too green. But he’s picked berries in Washington state for many
seasons and mastered it. He got to the point where he could pick with two
hands at once, gathering more than 50 pounds of berries an hour. Fast work
means earning a bit above the hourly minimum wage — $7.16 when he worked in
Washington.

But fast work in the berry fields, six days a week, has a price.

“You’re sitting, squatting all the time. I don’t like that,” Francisco says.
Legs and knees get sore, and he can’t do the work at the moment; he was
injured in the fields. But he says he’d pick again.

“I’m proud of the work,” he says. He steps back and looks at the produce aisle
like an artist in front of a painting. He likes to see how uniform all the
produce looks, even though most of it is too expensive for him to afford. But
he knows all the hard work that goes into making it look just right.

