On the 4th of June, on the occasion of cases filed in
[2003](http://search.japantimes.co.jp/cgi-bin/nn20050414a3.html) [en] and in
2005 whose protagonists were 10 children born out of wedlock to Japanese
fathers and Filipino mothers, the Supreme Court declared unconstitutional an
article of the [Nationality
Law](http://www.moj.go.jp/ENGLISH/information/tnl-01.html)[en] because it
infringes on [Article 14 of the
Constitution](http://www.solon.org/Constitutions/Japan/English/english-
Constitution.html#CHAPTER_III ) [en], which grants the right to equality.
According to the article, while a child born in wedlock to a Japanese father
and a foreign mother is in every respect recognized as a Japanese citizen,
before the June 4th decision children born out of wedlock were only recognized
as Japanese citizens if paternity had been confirmed before the child's birth.

![Figure of Japan's Nationality Law](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2008/11/nationality000.jpg)  
[id:Inflorescencia](http://d.hatena.ne.jp/inflorescencia/20081115/1226728277)
at her blog describes, through the use of pictures, details of the Nationality
Law and the process that brought about its revision.

On the 18th of November, after this historical ruling by the Supreme Court, [a
bill](http://www.shugiintv.go.jp/jp/video_lib3.cfm?deli_id=39408 ) [jp] was
passed by the House of Representatives to amend Article 3 of the Nationality
Law. However, while the enactment of the bill by the House of Councilors is
expected by the 30th of November, many [voices have been raised in opposition
to it](http://www19.atwiki.jp/kokuseki/).

Responding to these protests, Hideo Ogura at
[la_causette](http://benli.cocolog-
nifty.com/la_causette/2008/11/post-7b2f.html) posted an entry titled:
“Opposing to the revision of the Nationality Law, Clause 1, Article 3 is a
waste of energy” (国籍法３条１項の改正に反対することはエネルギーの無駄である). In it he refers to the
nationalist movement born on the Internet which opposes the decision of the
[the Supreme Court ](http://www.debito.org/?p=1715)[en] and the subsequent
amendment of the Law.

> 最高裁判所の違憲判決を受けて行われている国籍法改正について，相変わらずの人たちによる反対運動がネットを中心に熱心に行われているようです。  
>
> ただ，なんだか無駄なエネルギーを使っているようにしか私には見えません。というのも，上記国籍法改正を阻止できたところで，彼らが望んでいる社会にはならないからです

As often happens, a movement has been gaining ground recently, especially on
the Internet, which opposes revision of the Nationality Law proposed following
the ruling of the Supreme Court.  
To me this is nothing but a waste of energy. Because even if they managed to
block the mentioned revision, it wouldn't bring about the society that these
people are hope for.

> […]
> すなわち，上記国籍法改正を阻止してみたところで，法務局を困らせることにしか繋がらないのであって，仮にこの反対運動並び右派国会議員等からの圧力に屈してこの種の国籍取得届に対して国籍取得を認めない旨の通知を発する法務局が現れたところで，子供の親と法務局と裁判所に訴訟のための無駄な費用と労力をかけさせるだけに終わるのです（最高裁の大法廷で下された合憲限定解釈に敢えて逆らおうとする下級審というのもあまりいないように思いますし。）。  
>  ある種のゼノフォビアのために，国に無駄な仕事をさせようとする人々を，「愛国者」と呼ぶことに，私は大いなる躊躇を感じます。

That is to say, even if they block the mentioned amendment to the Nationality
Law, they would just cause problems at the Legal Affairs Bureau. And if,
hypothetically speaking, the opposition movement together with all the members
of the rightist national assembly, putting pressure, managed to get the Legal
Affairs Bureau to refuse Japanese citizenship to such children [under the
conditions newly established by the Supreme Court's ruling], the new lawsuit
would be a waste of money and labor for the child and his parents as well as
for the Legal Affairs Bureau and Court of Justice (Besides, it would seem
quite unlikely that the lower court would dare to go against the
[interpretation of the
constitution](http://ja.wikipedia.org/wiki/%E5%90%88%E6%86%B2%E9%99%90%E5%AE%9A%E8%A7%A3%E9%87%88)
[合憲限定解釈] [ja] set down by the Grand Bench of the Supreme Court.)  
Plus this bunch of people who are trying to pile useless work on the State
just for the sake of xenophobia, who pretend to be called “patriots”, perplex
me very much indeed.

