It seems that it is not only third world regimes who block people's blogs.
Apparently, Google's Blogspot has decided to join the bandwagon, and has
blocked Nawara Negm's Blog ([Tahyees [Ar]](http://tahyyes.blogspot.com/)),
without specifying any reasons. And [Ahmed
Shokeir](http://shokeir.blogspot.com/2008/11/blog-post_15.html) writes here
about the incident:

مع الساعات الأخيرة من الليل وبينما الكل يتأهب للذهاب للفراش ، فوجئ مجتمع
المدونين على الجايكو بخبر غير متوقع صطدم الجميع … وهو تعليق مدونة نوارة نجم
الشهيرة بجبهة التهييس الشعبية … لمخالفتها شروط الإستخدام حسب تعبير البلوجر

Everyone was about to go to sleep, when bloggers found an astonishing message
on [Jaiku](http://tafatefo.jaiku.com/presence/48940548#c-1801244) stating that
Nawara Negms’ blog (Gabhet El Tahyees El Shaabeya) has been blocked because it
violates Bloggers terms and conditions.

نوارة … وطبقا لإحصائيات جوجل ريدر تنشر أربعة وعشرون وسبعة من عشر تدوينة في
الإسبوع أي مايزيد عن أكثر من ثلاث تدوينات ونصف يومياً .. مَن مِن البشر يستطيع
أن ينشر هذا الكم من التدوينات التي تحمل رأي وفكر وتحليل ؟ ، تدوينات نوارة
بلاشك مدرسة خاصة في الكتابة حملت أسلوباً مبتكراً وجديداً في الكتابة العامية لا
يجيده أحد سواها

Nawara … And according to Google Reader's statistics publishes 24.7 blog posts
a week, i.e. more than 3.5 post per day. Who else can publish such number of
posts which are full of ideas and analysis? Nawara has her own distinguished
style as she writes in non-traditional Arabic slang.

أتوقع أن مدونتها سوف تعود في خلال أيام قليلة بعد مراجعة بلوجر لها ورفع التعليق
، فلايوجد في مدونتها مايخرق بأي شكل من الأشكال شروط بلوجر ، ولكن حتى العودة
يظل الجميع متشككاً في عودتها

I expect her blog to be back in few days, after Blogger checks its content, as
there is nothing in her blog that violates Blogger's terms and conditions. But
till then, everyone suspects her return.

