![](https://cdn-images-1.medium.com/max/800/1*G9Z74H4gvvCSbWFiIAAN6w.jpeg)

Credit: PesaCheck.org

_This article was[originally published](https://pesacheck.org/will-banning-
schoolgoing-mums-reduce-teen-pregnancy-in-tanzania-424c1245f06e) on
PesaCheck.org, __East Africa’s first fact-checking initiative._

Tanzanian President John Magufuli has called for teen mothers who get pregnant
while they are still in school [to be banned from returning once they have
given birth](http://www.theeastafrican.co.ke/news/Teen-pregnancies-Tanzania-
no-school-Magufuli/2558-3982870-1yjf4y/index.html).

[Speaking at a rally in
Chalinze](https://www.facebook.com/BBCSwahili/videos/1583580188327307/), a
small town in the eastern region of Pwani, President Magufuli chastised NGOs
in Tanzania for encouraging teenage mothers to go back to school, stating that
they were “finishing the country” and leading to a state of “moral decay” in
Tanzania:

> If a girl gets pregnant, if it is deliberate or by accident, gives birth and
> then returns to school, she will teach these others who haven’t given birth
> that this is okay. The same girl can then go again and get pregnant, give
> birth and go back to school. And again for a third time. Are we educating
> parents?

The president added that teen moms attending either primary or secondary
school would be banned from going back once they have given birth:

> I want to tell them, and those NGOs as well, that during my administration,
> no girl who has given birth will be allowed to go back to school .

The president went on to say that teen mothers could go elsewhere if they want
to get an education, such as the [Vocational Educational and Training
Authority](http://www.veta.go.tz/), or even taking up farming.

The announcement sparked outrage on social media, with Tanzanians [using the
#ArudiShule (return to school)
hashtag](http://www.africanews.com/2017/06/23/tanzanians-chide-president-
magufuli-over-teenage-mothers-school-ban//) to criticize the move, especially
considering that over 8,000 Tanzanian girls drop out of school every year due
to pregnancy according to [a Human Rights Watch
report](https://www.hrw.org/news/2017/06/16/africa-make-girls-access-
education-reality).

So, the question is, do student-mothers influence other students’ reproductive
behaviour?

[PesaCheck](http://pesacheck.org/) has researched the issue, with input from
citizen-centered initiative [Twaweza](https://www.twaweza.org/go/what-is-
twaweza), and finds that President Magufuli’s statement is MISLEADING for the
following reasons:  
![](https://cdn-images-1.medium.com/max/800/1*FKijq_qpR8ywtAaeaEs6lA.jpeg)

### **Causes of adolescent pregnancies**

According to the [Tanzania Health and Demographic Survey (THDS)
2015–16](https://dc.sourceafrica.net/documents/117952-2015-16-TDHS-MIS-Key-
Findings-English.html#document/p22/a330) the rate of adolescent pregnancies in
mainland Tanzania is considerably high at 27%. What factors contribute to this
figure?

A [publication by
HakiElimu](http://hakielimu.org/files/publications/Watoto%20Wetu%20Waendelee%20na%20Shule%20Baada%20ya%20Kujifungua.pdf)
found citizens opinion on the key contributors to teen pregnancies includes
low household income. The publication[
states](https://dc.sourceafrica.net/documents/117951-Watoto-Wetu-Waendelee-Na-
Shule-Baada-Ya-Kujifungua.html#document/p8/a320) that nearly 31% of the
respondents (including parents and teenage girls) thought that poverty was a
key factor, with difficult economic situations driving parents to marry off
their children as they are not able to meet the basic needs of the female
children.

The THDS report also shows that fertility varies with economic levels,
decreasing with increasing household wealth. Wealthier households also have a
higher age at first birth, meaning that poorer households are more likely to
have younger mothers, most likely of schoolgoing age.

Corroborating this fact, a [UNICEF
report](https://www.unicef.org/tanzania/TANZANIA_ADOLESCENT_REPORT_Final.pdf)
shows that one in six young women aged 15–19 is married in Tanzania. These
girls get affected psychologically, meaning that many of them are unable to
return to school once they drop out.

Another [factor](https://dc.sourceafrica.net/documents/117951-Watoto-Wetu-
Waendelee-Na-Shule-Baada-Ya-Kujifungua.html#document/p9/a322) in the HakiElimu
publication was “poor upbringing and teenage girls own personal desires”. They
found that some parents don’t spend time on their children’s morals and
upbringing. Another
[finding](https://dc.sourceafrica.net/documents/117951-Watoto-Wetu-Waendelee-
Na-Shule-Baada-Ya-Kujifungua.html#document/p10/a324) was the lack of
reproductive education which helps teens to fully understand puberty. “A lot
of parents in villages don’t speak to their female children who are going
through puberty.” TDHS 2015 data shows that over half of women already
experience sex before the age of 16.

[The HakiElimu report](https://dc.sourceafrica.net/documents/117951-Watoto-
Wetu-Waendelee-Na-Shule-Baada-Ya-Kujifungua.html#document/p10/a4) also found
another contributing factor to be the societal view of a girls child’s value
is in being married and being a mother.

The [TDHS 2015–16 report
](https://dc.sourceafrica.net/documents/117952-2015-16-TDHS-MIS-Key-Findings-
English.html#document/p5/a325)shows that fertility rates are strongly related
to the level of education. It states that women with no education have 3.3
times more children than women with secondary education. Adolescent women with
no education are 5 times more likely to have begun childbearing compared to
those with secondary or higher education. TDHS 2010 as stated in the [UNICEF
report](https://www.unicef.org/tanzania/TANZANIA_ADOLESCENT_REPORT_Final.pdf)
(p.12) found that for a majority of the girls who give birth while they are
“still children themselves” are in fact not in school.

### **Are student-mothers key influencers of adolescent pregnancies?**

According to the
[THDS](https://dc.sourceafrica.net/documents/117955-2015-16-TDHS-
MIS.html#document/p22/a331), Zanzibar has a significantly low rate of
adolescent pregnancies at 8% compared to mainland Tanzania. Zanzibar
introduced a return to school policy in 2010 as a measure to reduce dropouts.
[Kenya](https://dc.sourceafrica.net/documents/117954-KenyaHealthSurvey.html#document/p93/a329)
is just in between Tanzania mainland and Zanzibar with 18% adolescent
pregnancies. In both these places student mothers are going to school and the
adolescent fertility is much lower.

Therefore the statement that student mothers returning to school will
influence other students and lead to a rise in teenage pregnancies is
MISLEADING. Most research around adolescent pregnancies attribute teen
pregnancies to economic factors and the community attitude and upbringing of
female children.

**_Do you want us to fact-check something a politician or other public figure
has said about public finances?_**[ ** _Fill this
form_**](https://docs.google.com/forms/d/e/1FAIpQLSeI9xshwBWxwDuLwT4jhR9hdRLUNkwdjo0sqEqV9N5r5lCQYQ/viewform)
** _, or reach out to us on any of the contacts below, and we’ll help ensure
you’re not getting bamboozled._**

_This report was written by PesaCheck Fellow_ **Mwegelo Kapinga,** _a
development consultant, researcher and writer. Mwegelo has previously worked
for Twaweza East Africa as a research analyst. The infographics are by
PesaCheck Fellow_[ **Brian Wachanga**](https://twitter.com/McWachanga) _, who
is a Kenyan civic technologist interested in data visualisation. This report
was edited by PesaCheck Managing Editor_[ ** _Eric Mugendi_** **
_._**]("http://twitter.com/mougendi)

[**PesaCheck**](http://pesacheck.org/) **,** _co-founded by_[ **Catherine
Gicheru**](https://twitter.com/cgicheru1) _, is East Africa’s first fact-
checking initiative. It seeks to help the public separate fact from fiction in
public pronouncements about the numbers that shape our world, with a special
emphasis on pronouncements about public finances that shape government’s
delivery of so-called ‘Sustainable Development Goals’ or SDG public services,
such as healthcare, rural development and access to water / sanitation.
PesaCheck also tests the accuracy of media reportage. To find out more about
the project, visit_[ ** _pesacheck.org_**](https://pesacheck.org/) _._

