[![Screenshot of a video warning about the negative social impact of religious
discrimination and online hate speech. Source:
YouTube](https://globalvoices.org/wp-
content/uploads/2016/11/diversity.png)](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ztomg-
GWAtU)

Screenshot of a video warning about the negative social impact of religious
discrimination and online hate speech. Source: YouTube

Last year, Global Voices
[featured](https://globalvoices.org/2015/03/21/5-animated-videos-that-promote-
human-rights-and-equality-in-myanmar/) the work of Equality Myanmar, a non-
government organization which has been
[producing](http://equalitymyanmar.org/) multimedia materials to promote human
rights in Myanmar.

We highlighted five animated videos that explain the impact of violence in
communities in a simple yet creative format. The videos also aim to educate
viewers on how to effectively challenge oppression and empower the
marginalized sectors in society.

We are presenting four more videos that address the need to step-up the
information campaign to combat religious intolerance and racial bias in
Myanmar.

While Myanmar is embarking on a democratic transition, this process is being
undermined by the disturbing rise of religious extremism and xenophobia in
recent years.

There have been intermittent clashes between Buddhist nationalists and Muslim
minority groups in several communities, especially in the western part of the
country. The upsurge in violence has displaced thousands of Muslims and other
minority ethnic groups. Meanwhile, hate speech on social media has reinforced
bigotry and racial intolerance which further victimized minority communities.

Myanmar civil society groups have launched various initiatives to promote
peace, justice, and tolerance. Even netizens are active in
[countering](https://globalvoices.org/2015/02/22/can-panzagar-flower-speech-
facebook-stickers-end-hate-speech-in-myanmar/) hate speech. The use of
animations is also a useful method to emphasize the mainstreaming of human
rights concepts in society.

These videos by Equality Myanmar reflect relevant issues which can be easily
understood by viewers. For example, this video about
[diversity](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ztomg-GWAtU) reminds viewers about
the role of online misinformation in spreading hate in a community:

In this video, volunteer groups representing different religions are united in
[distributing](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=s2lgTPty_-U) relief and
assistance to flood victims. It is a simple but powerful reminder that people
with different beliefs can live and work together in harmony:

This video explains how
[discrimination](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=9O7nGIj5yZ4) can deprive
young people of their right to think freely and creatively:

And finally, this video depicts the struggle of children
[migrants](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=KLVJZ2EtuaU&list=PLEFA6C8F93ABA10AF&index=9&spfreload=10)
who are forced to flee their homes. It underscores the
[need](http://equalitymyanmar.org/migrant-children-to-travel-in-safety/) to
understand the plight of refugees and the intervention of the state to rescue
children migrants from human traffickers. Another threat which the video also
presented is the racist attitude of many urban residents:

