![](https://globalvoices.org/wp-
content/uploads/2019/05/5242gaycouples-400x300.jpg)

Same-sex couple waiting to go on stage to receive gifts and congratulations by
government officials. Photo by Filip Noubel, used with permission.

May 24 is a day to remember for the LGBTQIA+ community in Taiwan: it marks the
date from which same-sex couples can get married legally.

Following a historical [vote at the national Legislature on May
17,](https://globalvoices.org/2019/05/21/love-wins-same-sex-marriage-law-
fully-endorsed-by-taiwans-legislature/) Taiwan has become the first country in
Asia to recognize and implement marriage equality.

Across the island, several hundred couples have wed their significant other,
and posted pictures on social media with the hashtag #524 (in Chinese, months
are named after numbers, thus 5 refers to May, and 24 to the day).

In Taipei, a crowd of newlyweds and supporters gathered at the [Xinyi district
Household Registration Office](https://xyhr.gov.taipei/), located at the foot
of the iconic [Taipei 101 ](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Taipei_101)tower, to
celebrate this legal victory. Twenty couples representing different gender and
age categories were congratulated by key figures of the LGBTQIA+ movement,
government officials, and representatives of foreign countries.

[Chi Chia-wei](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Chi_Chia-wei), a veteran activist
of the LGBTQIA+ movement, recalled on stage that thirty years ago, when he
started advocating for same-sex marriage, people told him he was suffering
from a “mental disorder”. He concluded emotionally that “it has been a very
long wait.”

Bellow is a photo gallery showing some of the highlights of the day in Taipei.

![](https://globalvoices.org/wp-content/uploads/2019/05/5242girls-
registration-400x300.jpg)

This couple had just finished their paperwork and are now officially married.
Photo by Filip Noubel, used with permission.

![](https://globalvoices.org/wp-
content/uploads/2019/05/5242girlsceremony-400x300.jpg)

The couple pose for a wedding picture. Photo by Filip Noubel, used with
permission.

![](https://globalvoices.org/wp-
content/uploads/2019/05/524oldercouple-400x400.jpg)

Government officials (on the left) congratulate an older gay couple. Photo by
Filip Noubel, used with permission.

![](https://globalvoices.org/wp-
content/uploads/2019/05/524ChiChiawei-320x400.jpg)

Veteran activist Chi Chia-wei in his colorful outfit. Photo by Filip Noubel,
used with permission.

![](https://globalvoices.org/wp-
content/uploads/2019/05/524younggaycouple-400x300.jpg)

Government officials (on the left) congratulating a younger gay couple. Photo
by Filip Noubel, used with permission.

![](https://globalvoices.org/wp-content/uploads/2019/05/524sign-400x300.jpg)

One of the many signs and stickers distributed at the event. Photo by Filip
Noubel, used with permission.

