[![](https://globalvoices.org/wp-
content/uploads/2017/07/TT-800x399.jpeg)](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=NYbEVcWsfMQ)

A screen grab from Jeyhun Amirkhanov's YouTube video on Lezgian Tongue
Twisters.

[Lezgi](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lezgian_language) is a Caucasian
language claiming around 800,000 speakers worldwide. It is well established in
its native region across the border between Azerbaijan and the Russian
Republic of Dagestan, where it enjoys official status. Nevertheless, the
United Nations Educational Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO)
[classified it as a “vulnerable” language](http://www.unesco.org/languages-
atlas/en/atlasmap/language-id-1072.html), one rarely spoken by children
outside of their home, thus jeopardizing its transmission to future
generations.

But one man is set to change that. Jeyhun Amirkhanov, a native Lezgi speaker
from Azerbaijan, uses
[YouTube](https://www.youtube.com/channel/UCuiNTl_r06mdvS0z1ec1j0A),
[Twitter](https://twitter.com/LekAmirkhanov), and
[Facebook](https://www.facebook.com/Lezgisadval/) to promote his region,
culture, and language. He explained the reasons behind his online activity to
Rising Voices:

> Losing a language is losing a whole culture, a way of thinking. It happens
> with most languages which are in danger, not only with us. […] I do this
> because I want our people to be more aware about their language, culture and
> history.

On his [YouTube
channel](https://www.youtube.com/channel/UCuiNTl_r06mdvS0z1ec1j0A), he shares
videos featuring local songs and showing the Caucasian landscapes. He has also
made a few videos about the language itself.

The video below is a list of six [tongue
twisters](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tongue-twister) in Lezgi, but perhaps
they should be called “throat twisters” instead, since Piotr Kozłowski, a
Lezgi-language learner and the founder of a website dedicated to Lezgi,
[confided](http://www.peterlin.pl/lezgi/chal.html) that trying to pronounce
them feels like it may “do terrible damage to your throat”:

The lack of formal education and support from the government make it difficult
for people to speak their language correctly, and with its 54 different
consonants, Lezgi can be very challenging to an untrained ear. In a more
recent [video](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=TJRTSLvAis0), Amirkhanov gave a
short lesson on [ejective
consonants](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ejective_consonant):

Luckily, he is not alone in his efforts to save the language. Another [YouTube
channel](https://www.youtube.com/channel/UCldYo46FSU5D4gnz-2Zax5Q) is set to
teach Lezgi to children, so even if kids with Lezgi roots live far from native
villages, they still have a chance to learn some of their mother (or father)
tongue.

