In response to the netizens’ talks and comments about [the “eluding cat”
incident](http://www.zonaeuropa.com/200902a.brief.htm#033), the Yunnan
provincial Publicity Department's Press and Publication Administration decided
to form an investigative committee on Feb 20. Moreover, the department had
invited netizens to form a investigative committee. In a few hours, 510
netizens registered to be involved in the committee, and the Yunnan government
randomly selected 8 netizens and public members as part of the committee,
together with 3 official representatives and 3 media representatives. The
incident of course shows how netizens’ power in giving pressure to the
government, however, many doubt the investigative committee being a PR show
for cooling down the public discontent.  
**  
Eluding the cat incident**

ESWN [has translated “eluding the cat” incident on 17 of
Feb](http://www.zonaeuropa.com/200902a.brief.htm#033). In brief, a young
Yunnan man Li Qiaoming was arrested for illegal logging in Beicheng town. He
was then seriously injured in the detention center in Feb 8 and died in four
days because of brain injury. The police report said that he ran into a wall
when he was playing “eluding the cat” game with other jail mates.

The whole story was so incredible and netizens started to use “eluding the
cat” in their online jokes.

Internet popular terms are very powerful in China, earlier on we have [Weng'an
“push ups”](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2008/07/07/china-lets-do-push-up),
and it has discredited local government even though the final report came out
and showed that local police hadn't lie about the incident – the suspect was
doing push ups on the bridge when the girl drowned herself in the river.

**Recruiting netizens for investigation**

In order to prevent history from recurring, the Yunnan publicity department
acted on it by inviting netizens to do investigation (via
[ESWN](http://www.zonaeuropa.com/200902a.brief.htm#039)). Netizen, end of the
wind, was appointed as the head of the netizen committee, while marginal
citizen, as the deputy.

End of the wind reported in [cat898 forum (in Feb
19)](http://club2.cat898.com/newbbs/dispbbs.asp?boardid=1&star=1&replyid=6377816&id=2688077&skin=0&page=1)
to other netizens about his appointment and swore that he would try his best
to find out the truth:

>
> 今天下午4点左右，我得知云南省委宣传部要组建网友和社会各界人士的调查委员会,调查发生在昆明晋宁县公安局看守所发生24岁的云南玉溪北城镇男子李乔明“躲猫猫”死亡事件。我马上拨打了公告上的报名电话。
>
> 有可能我是第一个打电话报名的，电话一打就通了，工作人员记录了我的网名、真实姓名、身份、电话、QQ号。据说之后的电话都打到爆。
>
> 到了晚上10点半，我在云南网上看到了调查委员会的名单，很意外，我成了委员会主任

This afternoon at about 4pm, I heard from the Yunnan publicity department that
they wanted to form an investigative committee on the death of 24 years old Li
Qiaoming in Yunan Yuxi Beicheng town detention center while playing “eluding
the cat”. I made the phone call immediately according to the notice.

