It has been 10 days that Edison Chen’s sex photos scandal occupied the front
page of local newspapers ([ESWN has summed up local newspapers report
everyday](http://www.zonaeuropa.com/200802a.brief.htm#008).) The issue is not
only a sex scandal about various prominent local pop stars, but also an
outburst in response to the tension caused by the “indecent and obscene
censorship” system and the police’s abuse of power.

I have written a post at
[interlocals.net](http://www.interlocals.net/?q=node/902) on the political
implications of the issue and have been writing citizen reports in Chinese at
inmediahk.net. In brief, because the victims of the scandal refused to stand
out for a testimony at the beginning, the police did not treat the case as the
“stealing of private data”. Instead, they applied the Control of Indecent and
Obscene Article Ordinance (OAO) to crack down on the distribution of the
photos on the Internet. Local netizens were agitated, when the police
prosecuted the first netizen suspect who had uploaded one of the photos and
when the magistrate rejected his request for bail. The suspect is now being
held in custody for eight weeks until the next hearing.

Netizen from [Hong Kong Golden
Forum](http://forum2.hkgolden.com/view.asp?message=1115860) designed a poster
stating that “We want fair treatment, Not scapegoat!” and launched an online
fund raising for putting up an advisement against police abuse of power. A new
internet forum, [the Coalition of Hong Kong online
community](http://bbs.guestbook.com.tw/b10/viewforum.php?f=1&mforum=hklawsucks)
has been set up to discuss about fund raising and protest organizing matters.

![](https://www.globalvoicesonline.org/wp-content/uploads/2008/02/fair-
poster.jpg)

Then the head of the police force, Tang King-sing, added oil to the fume by
claiming that the possession of the photos and e-mail, mobile and other P2P
sharing of the photos may violate the OAO.

Diumanpark exclaimed:

> 香港大鑊了，上有淫審處，將不雅物品的名單無限擴大，下有警務處，不用甚麼發放意圖的明確證據，就可以勤快地捉拿收藏者，這簡直是將廿三條用另一種形式實現了…

Hong Kong is in deep shit, up there, we had the Obscene Article Tribunal which
keeps on adding to the list of obscene articles; down there, we have the
police department which takes action against netizens without concrete
evidence that they have the intention to distribute the photos. This is
another form of the Article 23…

> 我很相信，全世界(當然包括香港)有90%男人曾經管有過淫褻及不雅照片，剩下10%未曾管有過的，則因性壓抑過度而有很
> 大機會成為性罪犯、連環殺手等危險人物。為了應付這群犯罪的男人，政府實有必要放棄文娛區和政府總部計劃，用西九和天馬艦的地皮興建超級監獄，安置如此龐
> 大的積犯。

I believe that in the whole world (including HK) 90% of the male population
has once possessed indecent and obscene photos, for the remaining 10%, they
are probably criminals and serial killers because of sexual repression. In
order to deal with all these male criminals, the government has to abandon the
construction of Western Kowloon Cultural District and new government building
and use the land for a super size prison.

Obviously, the case is a selective prosecution, as most of the people who have
uploaded or possessed the photos are still free. [Lamtw
asked](http://lamtw.blogspot.com/2008/01/blog-post_30.html):

> 我不明白的，是為何警方這麼緊張。警方可否解釋一下，為何要這麼緊張，找國際刑警幫助，是不是因為涉及英皇集團的藝人？

I don’t understand why the police force is so high-sounding this time. Can
they explain why they have to seek help from the International Criminal Police
Organization? Because the issue involves pop stars from the
[Emperor?](http://www.emperor.com.hk)

>
> 老實說，如果是真相，發佈這些真相，的確犯了發佈淫褻及不雅物品的法例，但是香港有數以N計的網站，每日有網友上載這些相片，有很多為了逃避本地執法，將資料寄存在外地。為什麼涉及「陳冠希」和「女星」便這麼緊張？

To be frank, if the photos are real, the distributors have violated the OAO,
but there are numerous websites in Hong Kong and netizens upload similar
photos to those sites everyday. Some would have the server overseas. Why do
the police become so high-sounding in the crack down when the issue involves
“Edison Chen” and other “actresses”?

Evchk, a localized version of wikipedia on internet big issue, pointed out
that the police action and the court’s ruling is [another case of “the poor is
XX under the
law”](http://evchk.wikia.com/wiki/%E6%B3%95%E5%BE%8B%E9%9D%A2%E5%89%8D%EF%BC%8C%E7%AA%AE%E4%BA%BA%E5%90%AB%E6%92%9A).
Netizen has designed a [protest
picture](http://evchk.wikia.com/wiki/Image:20080202_e3840656400b18b2c0d9793ksYJ1L9Tx.jpg)
against the legal system.

![](https://www.globalvoicesonline.org/wp-content/uploads/2008/02/fair-
poster2.jpg)

[Tang King posted a recent court case to show how unfair the court judgment
is](http://www.xanga.com/hystericireul/640445895/item.html). In the case
[KCCC765/08] a car seller was in suspect of paying three under-aged girls for
having sex and taping the sex scene. The suspect was charged for 16 criminal
offences. However, he managed to bail out with HKD$40,000.

> 誘姦，拍片，令人身心備受永久重創的強姦疑犯，為甚麼竟比只發開了十二張並非自創，而且亦未定不雅/ 淫褻的照片更有資格保釋？…  
>  請告訴我：為甚麼單憑數張白金信用卡，數十萬元卡數欠款，便無視被告有工作在身，有能力還款的事實，而一口咬定他別有用心？

A rape suspect of seductive rapes and who had video tapped the process can
enjoy bail out, while a distributor of 12 photos (editor note: the suspect has
only uploaded one photos) can’t.  
Please tell me, why the possession of a few golden visa cards and half a
million debt would lead to the conclusion that the suspect has bad intention,
while neglecting the fact that he has proper work to do and can deal with his
debt?

On Feb 5, inmediahk.net organized an action to visit the first netizen suspect
and offered help for legal assistance. There is [a joint
statement](http://www.inmediahk.net/public/article?item_id=295773) on the
website demanding 1. a court revealed of the bail arrangement; 2. a
clarification of the nature of the case as “stealing of private data”; 3. a
reform on the Control of Indecent and Obscene article Ordinance and system in
order to avoid police abuse of power; 4. The resignation of Tang King-sing for
launching the selective prosecution and creating such chaos. [A video on the
action](http://hk.youtube.com/watch?v=DIGHKcmSAaI&eurl=http://www.inmediahk.net/public/article?item_id=299364&group_id=72)
has been posted [on youtube](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=DIGHKcmSAaI) :

Even though 7 people have been arrested and the police claimed that they had
found the source, the problem is yet to be solved as the Internet is
borderless. Confronting the netizens’ outrage, on Feb 5, the assistant head of
the police force tried to clarify that possession and sharing (among friends)
of the obscene photos would not violated the OAO. But it seems that the
messages are too late and too weak.

On the other hand, some netizens still blamed Edison and set up a [facebook
group](http://www.facebook.com/group.php?gid=21725605344&ref=nf). On 5 of Feb,
Edison Chen had finally [broken the silence
](http://hk.youtube.com/watch?v=FYQf4jT_RDc&feature=related), apologized to
the actresses involved and asked netizens to destroy their copies of the
photos.

From the very first day, Kurk compared the issue with [the Japanese Comic “the
Death Note” that everyone can be the “Killer” in the Internet
era](http://www.xanga.com/Kursk/640119323/item.html). The source of origin has
lost its meaning, someone else, probably away from Hong Kong, has taken up the
“Killer” role in distributing the photos. 200 more photos were distributed via
emails and P2P communication devices yesterday (Feb 6, 2008). It is quite
clear that the Killer wants to challenge the local police force.

[Kendo 1231 pointed out](http://kendo1231.blogspot.com/2008/02/blog-
post_01.html) that the most important task is no longer catching the “Killer”
as the photos have taken effect on the society already:

>
> 捕捉到奇拿否並不最重要，最重要是如何重整香港追星族的震撼和給予了她們什麼影響。藝人亦是人，其有愛恨七情六慾，大家無須要投石扮衛道，關上門你在私下亦是一樣。當然藝人成為形象偽人便再已經沒有形象可言，代言人資格可休矣，這回合社會已經要接受沖擊。

The most important task is not to catch the “Killer” now but to address the
effect of the photos on the “fans”. Pop stars are also human being, they have
love and sex, we don’t have to pretend to be moralists. Behind the door, we
are doing the same thing. Of course when the fans realized that the “images”
of the pop stars are faked, they can’t be the spoke person anymore. The
society has to undertake such effect.

