[![Popular Tibetan singer Gepe was arrested after singing in a music concert.
Screen capture from YouTube.](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2014/05/screen-capture-gepe.png)](http://youtu.be/W-akSdpOvHk)

Popular Tibetan singer Gepe was arrested after singing in a music concert.
Screen capture from YouTube.

Tibetan singer Gepe was arrested on 24 May 2014 in Sichuan province after his
performance in a concert attended by thousands.

The concert, organized by a group of Tibetan youth, had received permission
from local authorities, and according to a [report from Voice of
America](http://www.voanews.com/content/china-arrests-popular-tibetan-singer-
after-packed-concert/1923913.html), the concert was to address the importance
of Tibetan language and culture.

Gepe is a popular singer from Ngaba in Amdo. Back in 2012, after he released
an album that expresses the pain of separation from his spiritual leader and a
strong desire for Tibetan unity, he disappeared for quite a lengthy period of
time. Below is one of his songs, “I am coming” with English subtitles
translated by Grey Buffalo:

Gepe is not the first Tibetan singer to be prosecuted in China. Since the
unrest of March 2008 in Lhasa, [Tibetan
artists](http://www.reuters.com/article/2010/05/18/us-china-tibet-culture-
idUSTRE64H0OH20100518) have been one of the targets of political suppression.
Tibetan author and poet Tsering Woeser described the series of crackdowns as
“the same policies of the Cultural Revolution but of a different name”.

Last December, Thinley Tsekar and Gonpo Tenzin [were arrested in Diru
County](http://www.tchrd.org/2013/12/china-arrests-two-tibetan-singers-in-
diru/). Both sing about Tibetan identity, culture and language. Thinley was
sentenced to nine years imprisonment for “mobilizing anti-government
sentiments among Tibetan listeners of his music”. Here is one of his songs
available on YouTube:

In April 2012, popular Tibetan singer Lo Lo was arrested after he released an
album titled “Raise the flag of Tibet, sons of snow”. The singer was
eventually sentenced to six years imprisonment in August 2013. Below is one of
his songs via YouTube:

A [portion of the lyrics reads](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=6600FlaUp-I):

> To promote loyalty to the Land of Snows  
>  For the complete independence of Tibet  
>  With a realised understanding of our objectives  
>  Raise the flag of Tibet- sons of the snow

In March 2012, popular singer Ugyen Tenzin [was
detained](http://www.rfa.org/english/news/tibet/song-03262012190715.html)
after the release of his album titled “An Unending Flow of My Heart's Blood”.
Some of his songs are dedicated to spiritual leaders including the Dalai Lama
and Karmapa. Below is his album's theme song, “The Heart's Blood Flows”, with
English subtitles translated by “High peaks pure earth”:

In 2011, well-known female singer Hortsang Lhalung Tso [was detained before
attending a Tibetan culture
show](http://www.thetibetpost.com/en/news/tibet/1967-chinese-authorities-
detain-tibetan-female-singer-lhalung-tso) in Sangchu county with other popular
Tibetan singers and musicians. Here is one of her songs on YouTube:

