[![Thousands of anti-greed bill protestors gathered at Tap Seac Square before
the rally started. Photo from All About Macau Facebook page. Non-commercial
use.](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-content/uploads/2014/05/macau-
protest-1.jpg)](https://www.facebook.com/allaboutmacau/photos/pcb.661541847244323/661541480577693/?type=1&theater)

Thousands of anti-greed bill protestors gathered at Tap Seac Square before the
rally started. Photo from All About Macau's Facebook page. Non-commercial use.

More than 20,000 Macau residents rallied on Sunday, 25 May, 2014, against a
bill that would [compensate high-ranking
officials](http://www.macaudailytimes.com.mo/macau/53022-petition-against-
high-officials-compensation-scheme-lawmakers-push-for-swift-vote.html) after
they leave office and [exempt the head of government from criminal
liability](http://www.thestandard.com.hk/news_detail.asp?pp_cat=30&art_id=145619&sid=42309871&con_type=1)
during his or her term.

Macau, a special administrative region of China, has a population of about
500,000. Protesters constituted 4 percent of the total population, the
[largest
demonstrations](http://www.macaudailytimes.com.mo/macau/53091-%E2%80%9Cdrop-
it%2C-chui%21%E2%80%9D%E2%88%92-crowd-rallies-against-top-officials-
compensation-bill.html) since the former Portuguese colony was handed over to
China's control in 1999. The public outrage has surprised many, given
opposition parties are rather weak in the casino city and major mainstream
media outlets are pro-government mouthpieces and sponsored by the government.

The bill, which is expected to be passed on Tuesday, 27 May, 2014, was drafted
by the Macau Secretary for Administration and Justice a month ago and was
proposed without public consultation. It will grant the chief executive, as
the head of government is called, immunity from criminal prosecution while in
office. It also ensures that the outgoing chief executive, as well as his
principal officials-designate, will continue receiving a monthly payment
equivalent to 70 percent of his or her monthly salary. The secretary claimed
that the bill is to attract business elites to join the government.

The selection of new chief executive will happen at the end of 2014, and after
that major officials will also leave their positions. Many believe that the
bill is tailor-made for outgoing Chief Executive Fernando Chui Sai-on and top
officials because they will be the ones to immediately enjoy the new
privileges.

Even though the bill is highly controversial, the administration has been
pushing the legislative council to pass it. The majority of lawmakers are
either elected indirectly through functional groups or appointed by the chief
executive.

To press the government to withdraw the bill, a group of concerned citizens
called “[Macau Conscience](https://www.facebook.com/macauconscience?fref=ts)”
organized the march against “[the Bill of Greed and
Privilege](https://www.facebook.com/events/584951708284794/?ref=5).”

Independent media outlet All About Macau [asked one of the
protesters](https://www.facebook.com/allaboutmacau/posts/661541847244323) on
their Facebook group why she joined the rally:

> 市民林小姐認為特首在有可能臨離任的時候通過這個法案，是「打劫澳門市民」，根本是與民為敵；

> Ms. Lam believes that the chief executive who will enjoy the outgoing
> compensation is “robbing Macau citizens” and making himself an enemy of the
> people.

Many expressed their anger through banners and placards while at the protest.

[![ A protest placard showing the Macau Chief Executive's face on a underworld
bank note. The slogan on the placard is:  A monthly salary more than 200
thousand dollars \[about 25 thousand US dollars\] wanted out-going
compensation? Impotent officials are out of their mind! Photo from All About
Macau Facebook Page](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2014/05/macau-
protest-2.jpg)](https://www.facebook.com/allaboutmacau/photos/pcb.661563683908806/661563220575519/?type=1&theater)

A protester holds a placard showing the Macau chief executive's face on a fake
bank note. The slogan on the placard reads: “A monthly salary more than
200,000 pataca [about 25,000 US dollars] wanted as outgoing compensation?
Impotent officials are out of their mind!” Photo from All About Macau's
Facebook page

[![Young people stand out and say no to the Bill of Greeds. Photo from All
About Macau Facebook page. Non-commercial
use.](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-content/uploads/2014/05/macau-
protest-3-800x600.jpg)](https://www.facebook.com/allaboutmacau/photos/pcb.661563683908806/661563443908830/?type=1&theater)

Young people say no to the “Bill of Greed.” Photo from All About Macau's
Facebook page. Non-commercial use.

[![Protestors stick  the face of Secretary for Administration and Justice,
Florinda Chan Lai-man, onto a pig-shape placard to mock at her greed. Chan is
the drafter of the bill. Photo from All About Macau's Facebook page. Non-
commercial use. ](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2014/05/macau-
protest-4.jpg)](https://www.facebook.com/allaboutmacau/photos/pcb.661631263902048/661629480568893/?type=1&theater)

Protestors stick the face of Secretary for Administration and Justice Florinda
Chan Lai-man onto a pig-shaped placard. Chan drafted the bill. Photo from All
About Macau's Facebook page. Non-commercial use.

[![A young man staged the PK body posture against  the Greed Bill in the
protest. PK posture is an bodily expression of absurdity among youngster in
East Asia.\] Photo posted by Facebook user Ar B Cheong. Non-commercial use.
](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-content/uploads/2014/05/PK-
macau.jpg)](https://www.facebook.com/photo.php?fbid=10203972699301163&set=p.10203972699301163&type=1&theater)

A young man assumes the so-called PK body position, otherwise known as
planking, against the bill during the rally. The posture is meant to show
absurdity and is used among youth in East Asia. Photo posted by Facebook user
Ar B Cheong. Non-commercial use.

Soon after the rally, a number of pro-government lawmakers and executive
councilors told the press that their would propose to the chair of the
Legislative Council to form a committee to further review the bill. At the
same time, organizer of the rally “[Macau
Conscience](https://www.facebook.com/macauconscience)” said they would take
further action if the legislature passes the bill on Tuesday.

