2011 began with a series of crackdowns by the Chinese authorities to prevent
the Arab Jasmine Revolution from landing in mainland China. It ended with a
series of uprisings in grassroots communities where people have been
devastated by corrupt local governments and illegal land acquisitions.

**Jasmine crackdowns**

The Jasmine uprising in the Arab world has
[reminded](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2011/01/17/china-tense-days-and-
nights-in-tunis) the Chinese people of their own political history in fighting
against authoritarian rule. The [downfall of
Mubarak](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2011/02/13/china-farewell-to-all-
mubaraks) in Egypt has of course alerted the illegitimate authoritarian regime
in China.

[Without confronting any real
threat](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2011/03/01/china-not-tweeting-a-
revolution), the Chinese Communist Party (CCP) [started off the year with a
heavy-handed crackdown](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2011/02/23/china-
playing-revolution-on-twitter), targeting [online opinion
leaders](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2011/02/26/china-jasmine-revolution-
week-two) and human rights activists in February 2011. Amongst them are
blogger-activist [Liu Di](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2011/03/31/china-the-
interrogation-a-tale-of-ai-and-revolution), prominent artist-activist [Ai
Weiwei](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2011/04/04/china-ai-weiwei-detained-
initial-twitter-reactions), Sichuan writer [Ran
Yunfei](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2011/04/09/china-ran-
yunfei%e2%80%99s-blogging-for-political-change), Shanghai lawyer [Li
Tiantian](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2011/05/30/china-detained-rights-
lawyer-interrogated-about-sex-life), Sichuan legal activist [Li
Shuangde](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2011/06/01/china-first-jasmine-
sentence-handed-down) and Beijing activist [Wang
Lihong](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2011/07/18/china-campaigning-for-the-
release-of-female-activist-wang-lihong).

[![Christian Bale, image from Weibo](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2011/12/bale3-375x275.jpg)](http://www.weibo.com/1930653571/xCgjP9ZYU)

Christian Bale, image from Weibo

Even though the atmosphere has been tense, info-activists continued to
campaign for all the political detainees. The [Free Chen Guangcheng
campaign](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2011/09/19/china-calls-to-free-blind-
activist-met-with-violence) has been ongoing for months since September 2011,
and the most recent development was [actor-activist Christian Bale's rough
encounter with village
guards](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2011/12/16/china-actor-christian-bale-
roughed-up-trying-to-visit-chen-guangcheng) when he attempted to pay Chen a
visit.

**Grassroots conflicts**

Social conflicts kept bursting in on the grassroots communities throughout
2011. The first case at the beginning of the year was the [citizen
investigation of the suspected murder of Qian
Yunhui](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2011/01/03/china-nationwide-truth-
crisis-as-qian-yunhuis-death-ruled-an-accident), a village head in Zhejiang
province who opposed forced land acquisitions in Yueqing county. While
official investigation concluded it as an accident, many netizens believed
that it was a murder as the county government has too much embedded interests
in the developmental projects.

While rural areas were ruined by land seizure, urban areas were threatened by
property bubbles. The majority of city dwellers believed that the government
should introduce policy to cool down the property market. They displayed their
anger towards the unrealistic [Communist Party
propaganda](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2011/01/04/china-voila-rmb-77-rent-
per-month), which claimed that generous rental subsidies are available to help
low-income families in Beijing.

Instead of helping the poor, many cities have adopted the policy to [clear the
“unwanted”](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2011/04/18/china-clearing-urban-
centers-of-unwanted-people) people. The income disparity and social injustice
has resulted in bitter resentment among the “unwanted” poor towards the rich
and the [government
officials](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2011/08/25/china-three-public-
expenditures-and-state-secrets).

Netizens’ reactions on the [murder case of Yao
Jiaxin](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2011/04/21/china-the-murder-case-of-
yao-jiaxin) reflected the popular feeling. [Taxi
drivers](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2011/08/08/china-taxi-drivers-and-
railway-workers-on-strike) were among the first social groups to taste the
effect of inflation on their living. On the other hand, as the society became
more unstable and the economy was taking a downturn, [the rich
fled](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2011/04/26/china-the-rich-are-fleeing),
[bosses run away](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2011/10/06/china-the-runaway-
bosses-of-wenzhou-city) and [civil
servants](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2011/11/17/china-suicide-civil-
servants-in-depression-or-being-depressed) committed suicides.

Children are the most vulnerable social group in such an unjust society. In
the rural areas, [58 million children have been left
behind](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2011/11/16/china-photo-captures-plight-
of-58-million-left-behind-children) by their parents, who went to the cities
in search of jobs. Many became the [victims of
kidnapping](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2011/10/10/china-do-you-have-
memories-from-before-you-were-kidnapped). Most terribly, child rapists are
protected by the [“underage prostitution
law”](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2011/12/08/china-outrage-as-underage-
prostitution-law-protects-child-rapists).

[Food safety remains an unresolved
problem](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2011/04/17/china-recent-scandals-show-
ongoing-battle-for-food-safety). Poisonous milk scandals kept popping up
throughout the year. Mainland Chinese crossing the border for milk powder has
resulted in a [shortage in Hong
Kong](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2011/03/14/hong-kong-panic-over-milk-
powder-shortage). When Japan was facing a nuclear radiation crisis after the
earthquake, Chinese people's immediate response was the [panic
buying](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2011/03/16/china-salt-radiation-rumors-
fuel-widespread-panic-buying) of sea salt. However, the impact of radiation is
probably less than that of the chemicals found in
[watermelons](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2011/07/08/china-exploding-
watermelon-is-safe) and
[vinegar](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2011/08/02/china-chemical-vinegar).

**Overdevelopment and uprisings**

Many of the grassroots conflicts were the results of unrestrained development.
The [impact of the construction of the Three Gorges
Dam](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2011/05/23/china-three-gorges-dam-a-time-
to-reflect) on the country's environment is yet to be evaluated.

![Thousands of people blocked the entrance of an express road. Photos widely
circulated in Weibo.](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2011/12/highspeed-300x300.jpg)

Thousands of people blocked the entrance of an express road. Photos widely
circulated in Weibo.

In August, a large scale [not-in-my-backyard mobilization took place in
Dalian](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2011/08/14/china-large-nimby-protest-
erupts-in-dalian) and the local government was forced to accept residents’
demand to relocate a chemical factory. The year ended with two successful
uprisings in Guangdong province at
[Wukan](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2011/12/12/china-a-guangdong-village-
on-the-verge-of-a-brutal-crackdown) and
[Haimen](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2011/12/20/china-guangdong-uprising-
now-in-haimen). Both were against major developmental projects which generated
profit by seizing people's land.

**China Model**

On one hand, the Chinese authority is very proud of the rise of China as a
strong nation. A number of movies, such as [_Beginning of the Great
Revival_](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2011/06/17/china-mixed-reactions-to-
communist-party-movie-epic), have been produced to celebrate the 90th
anniversary of the CCP.

On the other hand, in order to confront social and political discontents
without harsh repressions, the CCP tries to explore [different governance
models](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2011/08/14/china-model-in-two-
different-cities) to solve its legitimacy crisis. Some scholars advocated the
[restoration of Confucianism as the state
ideology](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2011/02/05/china-the-coming-of-age-
of-political-confucianism).

The CCP is unwilling to give up its one-party dictatorship model and introduce
political reform. It prefers [brainwashing
education](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2011/05/12/hong-kong-brainwashing-
education) and [red
propaganda](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2011/05/12/china-red-culture-fever)
rather than rational change of the political process, and depends on the
[stability
machine](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2011/10/31/china%E2%80%99s-stability-
machine-and-the-detention-of-chen-guangcheng) for maintaining social and
political order. Thus, rights defense actions were taken as
[insane](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2011/05/04/china-one-flew-over-the-
cuckoos-nest), [independent candidates’
campaigns](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2011/06/26/china-update-on-the-
independent-candidate-campaigns) in local elections were suppressed, [micro-
blogging platforms were under
attack](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2011/08/04/china-anger-over-state-tv-
attack-on-microblogging-platforms), and activists were subject to daily
monitoring.

The China Model seemed to have entered Hong Kong with the visit of China's
future premier Li Keqiang in August 2011. It is the first time in the city's
history that [a citizen was
arrested](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2011/08/17/china-and-hong-kong-
citizen-arrested-for-wearing-political-t-shirt) for wearing a political
T-shirt.

**Geopolitics**

The [costly space race](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2011/10/04/china-the-
cost-of-space-ambition) tells Chinese people and the world that the nation is
on the rise. Yet in terms of international politics, some scholars believe
that China is being [boxed-
in](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2011/11/09/china-on-the-rise-but-feeling-
boxed-in) geopolitically. The [Mekong river
massacre](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2011/10/30/china-questions-following-
mekong-river-massacre) and the [U.S diplomatic strategy in Asia
Pacific](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2011/11/20/china-us-begins-pacific-
century-online-nationalism-follows) have alerted the nationalists of China's
marginalized diplomatic position in the world.

However, the [imaginary
enemy](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2011/11/08/china-japans-imaginary-enemy)
game can never solve the internal social conflicts. Even though [some
intellectuals may find another revolution too remote and
unrealistic](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2011/12/26/china-only-talking-
about-a-revolution), democracy and freedom have definitely become an
aspiration of the commons in the year of the [100th anniversary of the Xinhai
Revolution](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2011/10/13/china-reflecting-
on-100-years-since-the-xinhai-revolution).

