Since 2009, there have been at least 17 Tibetan self-immolation incidents in
China. The latest case was
[reported](http://www.rfa.org/mandarin/yataibaodao/shi-01152012172917.html)
[zh] on January 15, 2012. The public discussion about the protests of Tibetans
has been manipulated and monopolized by state controlled media outlets who
blame the[ Dalai Lama](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dalai_Lama) and western
media for [inciting to violence and
terror](http://mili.cn.yahoo.com/ypen/20111125/720928.html) [zh].

[![](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2012/01/873583-375x249.jpg)](http://www.demotix.com/photo/873583/tibetan-
demonstration-dharamsala-against-china)

Honoring seven Tibetan monks who self-immolated – Dharamsala, India (Oct 14,
2011) Copyright © Demotix

The reaction among Chinese public intellectuals and netizens is practically
indifferent when compared to other self-immolation incidents, such as the
[Yihuang demolition](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2010/09/21/china-yihuang-
self-immolation-incident-and-the-power-of-microblogging/) case. Some netizens
wonder, where have all the public intellectuals gone?

![degewa](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2012/01/degewa-247x300.jpg)

Profile image of @degewa

Tibetan poet Woser ([@degewa](https://twitter.com/#!/degewa/)) is always among
the first people on Twitter to bridge Tibetan news to Chinese communities. On
January 15, after she read news of the self-immolation of a Tibetan monk near
Ge'erdeng Temple in Aba, Sichuan, she
[wrote](https://twitter.com/#!/degewa/status/158257594522279936) [zh]:

> 今晚，我们都在哭泣。。。先是我，与一位喇嘛说起同胞自焚，不禁落泪，他也哽咽。。。这么晚了，你欲言又止，终于哭出了声。。。

@degewa: Tonight, we are crying… first it was me telling a Lama that one of
his fellows had self-immolated. My tears kept running down. He could not
speak…. It is so late now, you want to talk, but words don't come out. Finally
you cry.

Is it because of sadness that people don't talk about it? Twitter user,
@lotusseedsD, who lives outside China wondered, [where have all the Chinese
netizens gone](https://twitter.com/#!/lotusseedsD/status/158377246741114880)?
And [why don't Han Chinese help bridging
out](https://twitter.com/#!/lotusseedsD/status/158375699902763010) [zh] the
information? [Han Chinese ](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Han_Chinese)are the
biggest ethnic group in China.

> 中国汉人为自焚的藏人做了什么？@wh_z @old_wine
> 相较国外的呼吁和翻墙出来的少数声音，除了会骂人傻逼互相掐架互相瞧不起，中国网民对藏人自焚的冷漠让人背脊发凉，让人不屑，让人引为齿。

[@lotusseedsD](https://twitter.com/#!/lotusseedsD/status/158377246741114880):
What have Han Chinese done for the Tibetans? @wh_z @old_wine. When compared
with overseas concerns and a minority of voices, Chinese netizens only enjoy
fighting and cursing online. Their indifference is so chilling and shameless.

> 藏人频繁自焚，请问中国民间舆论做了什么？ @wh_z @old_wine
> 我的意思是，中国网民有没有像乌坎动车追尾校车事故512地震等各种事件发帖，被删了又发，各个论坛删之不及制造舆论压力？中国汉人为自焚的藏人做了什么？？？？

[@lotusseedsD](https://twitter.com/#!/lotusseedsD/status/158375699902763010):
So many Tibetans have self-immolated. What have the public opinion leaders
done to help? @wh_z @old_wine. How come Chinese netizens do not bridge out
information, compete with the web censors and create public opinion pressure
like the case of the [Wukan
uprising](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Protests_of_Wukan), the school bus
accidents, and the 512 earthquake? What have Han Chinese done for Tibetans?

She challenged Chinese netizens to [look beyond their nationalistic
feelings](https://twitter.com/#!/lotusseedsD/status/158420964063969280) [zh]
and [reach out to help a group of human
beings](https://twitter.com/#!/lotusseedsD/status/158435281433935872) [zh] who
are in pain.

> 换个方式：把
> “藏汉”二个字从民族情结里去掉。17个生命用一种惊天动地的，在你居住的土地上以自焚方式求救呐喊想让人们听到他们的声音。您和您土地上的人，能为这17个宝贵的生命做些什么？继续要听不见呢还是用您微小力量把他们的求助声传播出去？

[@lotusseedsD](https://twitter.com/#!/lotusseedsD/status/158420964063969280):
Try to look beyond “Tibetan/Chinese” nationalistic feelings. 17 souls have
self-immolated on the land that you live in so as to make their voices heard.
What can you and people in your land do for these 17 precious lives? Continue
to play dumb or help to spread their voices?

>
> 关注自焚不是渲染鼓励。同是生活在一片土地上的人，都被欺压。你汉人或无法对藏人伸出援手，然而于人类最本能的感情上，是不是应该做到最起码的关心，让他们知道你们听到他们的求助呐喊痛苦？

[@lotusseedsD](https://twitter.com/#!/lotusseedsD/status/158435281433935872):
Showing concern about self-immolation is not incitement. People living with
you on the same piece of land are under oppression. You Han people may not be
able to help the Tibetans, but at least you can show some concern as human
beings. Let them know that you have heard their painful cries.

Also on January 15, @cecilcoe [pointed
out](https://twitter.com/#!/cecilcoe/status/158446953875783682) [zh] that the
online public sphere is highly manipulated by the web censors:

> 我可以作证：自焚者照片在新浪上一贴就删， 快得无法形容。 后来我改成贴台湾自焚者照片， 在文字中提到西藏自焚， 就比较慢。
> 在哪短短时间里有12个评论。当然，总人数没乌坎多， 但说汉人不关心， 也不尽然。

[@cecilcoe](https://twitter.com/#!/cecilcoe/status/158446953875783682): I can
testify: Sina deletes all the Tibetan self-immolation photos in a blink. Later
I posted Taiwanese self-immolation photos and mentioned the Tibet incidents,
and the deletion speed slowed down a bit and I received 12 comments. Of
course, the concern is much less than about Wukan, but not all Han people are
indifferent.

Human rights activist @tengbiao
[concurred](https://twitter.com/#!/tengbiao/status/158388527837614081) [zh]
that public intellectuals are playing dumb regarding the repression in Tibet:

> 藏人自焚这件事上，除了极少数几个例外，中国公共知识分子们集体哑火、装聋作哑。房间里的大象，沉默的共谋。他们和行凶者一样无耻。

[@tengbiao](https://twitter.com/#!/tengbiao/status/158388527837614081): Apart
from extremely few exceptions, Chinese public intellectuals are collectively
playing dumb about the Tibetan self-immolation incidents. As an elephant in
the room, their silence is a form of conspiracy. They are as shameless as the
murderers.

Prominent blogger @yanghengjun
[agreed](https://twitter.com/#!/yanghengjun/status/158396651206213632) [zh]
with Tengbiao:

> 他们点燃自己，照亮黑暗。怎奈我们在黑暗中太久，甚至变成了黑暗的一部分。

[@yanghengjun](https://twitter.com/#!/yanghengjun/status/158396651206213632):
They [the Tibetans] burned themselves to give light to the darkness. However,
we have lived in the darkness for too long and turned into part of the
darkness.

The above discussion does receive some proactive responses, dissident
@zhaoyang8964 also [spoke
out](https://twitter.com/#!/zhaoyang8964/status/158421609215041537) on Twitter
[zh]:

>
> 藏人自焚是源于对中共暴政的愤怒和绝望，也是以死明志的反抗！我身为汉人而为这个无耻的政权感到羞愧。所谓“西藏自古以来就是中国的领土”纯粹扯淡！尊者一向表明愿留在中国版图内但希望获得真正的自治，而无赖政府根本不尊重尊者，也从来不把藏人的诉求当回事。

[@zhaoyang8964](https://twitter.com/#!/zhaoyang8964/status/158421609215041537):
Tibetans self-immolated to express their anger and despair against the Chinese
Communist government's tyranny. They protested with their lives. As a Han
Chinese, I feel ashamed for such a shameless government. It is totally
bullshit to say that “Tibet has always been (since the ancient times) a part
of China.” His Holiness has been expressing his willingness to be a part of
the China territories, all he is asking for is genuine self-autonomy. But the
brutal government does not respect His Holiness nor the Tibetans’ demands.

Upon reading @degwa's tweets, Crazy Crab drew [a
cartoon](http://www.cartoonmovement.com/cartoon/4933) to mock the Chinese
government:

[![The Politburo Standing Committee on
Fire.](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-content/uploads/2012/01/tibet-
burning-375x300.jpg)](http://www.cartoonmovement.com/cartoon/4933)

The Politburo Standing Committee on Fire. Cartoon shared by Crazy Crab on
CartoonMovement.com

However, political statements could not help challenge the official discourse
about the immolation incidents. So far Wang Lixiong is the only Chinese
intellectual who [ has offered](http://zhu-ruiblog.blogspot.com/2012/01/blog-
post_11.html) [zh] an elaborate and counter-official view of the Tibetan
immolation incident. Below is a partial translation of his article written on
January 12 on Tibetan immolation:

>
> 施暴于自我，除了是出于绝望的抗议或对尊严孤注一掷的捍卫，若有对实效的企望，就如甘地所说：“通过我们所受的深重苦难，可以影响政府”；或马丁·路德·金所说：“我们将以自己忍受苦难的能力，来较量你们制造苦难的能力…耗尽你们的仇恨…唤醒你们的良知”。
>
> 这种企望的实现，前提是需要存在良知。专制政权的机器只有刚性结构、冷酷逻辑，以及官僚利益。当年几千孩子在天安门广场濒临死亡地绝食，有谁看到过它的良知？
>
> 以往非暴力抗争的局限就在此——结局不是取决抗争一方，而是政权。抗争方只能起压力作用，权力不让步就不会有进展，因此目前的西藏落入困境是必然。
>
>
> 走出困境，方向在哪里？我觉得是目前首要回答的。没有方向就只能盲目。哪怕是自焚的壮烈献身，也让人感觉更多是绝望。而各方面对自焚，除了情绪动荡，也是就事论事的茫然。
>
>
> 说自焚者有勇气没有智慧，是不公平。智慧不是苟且偷生的技巧，是能够带领西藏走出困境的高瞻远瞩。那不是普通民众应该和能够承担的。而把已退出政治的达赖喇嘛当作一切智慧的来源，则是不负责。达赖喇嘛确定了非暴力原则和中间路线，如何实现应该是政治家们的智慧。
>
> 目前还看不到这种智慧。中国方面只有一手钞票一手屠刀；西藏方面——假如流亡政府是代表的话，也看不出除了发表声明，还知道该做什么。
>
> 请告诉勇敢的藏人，他们可以做什么。知道了应该和能够做什么，他们就会活下去，而不是用惨烈自焚仅换来媒体的短暂一瞥。

To exercise violence upon oneself, apart from being a desperate protest and
defense of one's dignity – their expectation, if any, is similar to Gandhi's
teaching: “Change the government through our sufferings” or Martin Luther
King's saying: “We will wear you down by our capacity to suffer, and one day…
we will appeal to your heart and conscience that we will win you in the
process.”

The premise of such an expectation is the existence of a conscience. The
machinery of the authoritarian government has only an iron structure, cold
logic and bureaucratic interests. Many years ago, thousands of young people
were on hunger strike in Tiananmen Square. Who saw any conscience then?

The limitation of non-violent struggle is that its end depends on the state
power, not the protesters. The protest will only create pressure, it doesn't
go anywhere if the power does not compromise. That's why Tibet is trapped in
the current situation.

How to step out from this dead end? This is the most important question we
have to address. Without direction it will result in nihilism. The self-
immolation will bring more desperation. Apart from triggering emotions, it
offers no solution.

It is unfair to say that the self-immolating are not wise. To live without
dignity is not wise. The true wisdom is to bring Tibet out of the dead end
with a vision. Ordinary people cannot lead the way out. However, it is also
irresponsible to rely on the Dalai Lama who is slowly stepping out from the
political scene. Dalai Lama has put forward the non-violent principle and a
middle way, but it depends on the politicians’ wisdom to actualize it.

We can't see such wisdom at the moment. What the Chinese government has is a
pile of paper money and a butcher knife; As for Tibet, if the exile government
is the representative one, so far it doesn't know what to do apart from
issuing statements.

Please tell the courageous Tibetans what they can do. If they know what they
should/can do, they will live rather than use their own lives in exchange for
a blink of media attention.

