A few hours ago, the Norwegian Nobel Committee [announced its
decision](http://nobelprize.org/nobel_prizes/peace/laureates/2010/press.html#)
to award the 2010 Nobel Peace Prize to Liu Xiaobo for his long and non-violent
struggle for fundamental human rights in China.

It is a moment of great joy for concerned Chinese citizens as [Liu
Xiaobo](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Liu_Xiaobo) represents human rights
activists’ determination in struggling for the peaceful transformation of
China's political system. He was arrested in June 2009 and sentenced to 11
years imprisonment under the charge of “inciting subversion of state power”
after [Charter 08](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Charter_08), a proposal for
constitutional reform, was published.

**The Jailed Nobel Peace Award Winners**

However, the Chinese government, in response to the Nobel Committee's
decision,[claimed that
[zh]](http://www.mfa.gov.cn/chn/gxh/tyb/fyrbt/t759532.htm) Liu is a criminal
who has been found guilty in a Chinese court and that the Committee's decision
has violated the mission of the Nobel Peace Prize.

A tweet from Akiranns is probably [the best
response](http://twitter.com/#!/akiranns/status/26734694091) to the Chinese
government spokesperson's statement:

> 你知道上一位，获得诺贝尔和平奖的坐牢人士是谁么？卡尔·冯·阿希厄茨基。那时他的国家谁在执政？希特勒。

Do you know who the previous Nobel Peace Prize winner to receive the award
while in jail was? [Carl von
Ossietzky](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Carl_von_Ossietzky). And who was the
ruler of his country? Hitler.

**Netizens Arrested for Having Dinner Party**

As if to assert Akiranns’ association of the two Nobel Peace Prize winners’
backgrounds, Chinese police officers have chosen to crack down on Chinese
netizens’ spontaneous dinner celebrations of this memorable event in both
Shanghai and Beijing. Hanlu1911 [reports from one dinner on
Twitter](http://twitter.com/#!/hanlu1911/status/26737755204):

> 上海饭醉活动取消，关注被带走的石扉客和其他不知名草泥马，警察拿着围脖上头像来对人，一只年青的草泥马被认出，目前广场警察和便衣四处出没。

The Shanghai dinner and drinks party has been cancelled. Worried about Shi
Feike and other [Grass Mud
Horses](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Grass_Mud_Horse) (netizens) who have been
taken away by the police. Police officers brought along profile pictures from
Sina.com microblog accounts. One young grass mud horse has already been
identified this way. The police and undercovers are now wandering and checking
around in the square.

Teng Biao has identified at least [8 Chinese
netizens](http://twitter.com/#!/tengbiao/status/26739235146) who have been
taken away by police in [Beijing's
Dongcheng](http://twitter.com/#!/tengbiao/status/26738920924):

>
> 王荔蕻、天天刚刚被东城区警察带到景山派出所。“十几个人连踢带打,满嘴脏话,骂骂咧咧”。阿尔、小路、屠夫被带到和平里派出所。许志永、何杨、@pengmomo等都被警察带走。饭醉还没开始，就都被抓了。请关注！
>
> 因聚会庆祝和平奖被带到派出所的推友有：@wlh8964 @pengmomo @leewua @heyang519 @zhiyongxu
> @tufuwugan @xiaolu8964 @renjiaqi 等。请关注。

Wang Lihong and Tiantian were just taken away by the Dongcheng district police
to Jinshan police station. “A dozen of them cursed and kicked them away”. Ah
Er, Xiaolu, and The Butcher have been taken to Heping police station. Xu
Zhiyong, He Yang, @pengmomo and others were all taken away by police. The
dinner party hasn't even begun and they've already been arrested. Please pay
attention to this.  
  
Twitterers who has been taken to police station for celebrating the Peace
Award result are @wlh8964 @pengmomo @leewua @heyang519 @zhiyongxu @tufuwugan
@xiaolu8964 @renjiaqi and etc. Please pay attention.

**Censorship**

Apart from the arrest action, the propaganda machine has continued to keep the
news from spreading to the general public by imposing strict censorship on the
Internet.

First of all, all special feature on the Nobel Prize from major portal
websites have been taken down today, including the special feature from
[163.com, [Sohu.com](http://bit.ly/amVmm6), [Tencent and
[Sina.com](http://news.sina.com.cn/z/2010Nobel).
](http://news.qq.com/)](http://news.163.com/special/2010NobelPrize/)

Secondly, the Chinese term “Nobel Prize” (諾貝爾) and “Peace Prize” (和平獎) became
unsearchable in major search engines.

Third, soon after the announcement was made, twitterers, such as @haojinsong
[reported that](http://twitter.com/#!/haojinsong/status/26731698350) mobile
text messages with sensitive term “Liu Xiaobo” (劉曉波) could not be sent out.

**Creative expression**

Despite all these censorship measures, words still spread around the Chinese
internet. For example, on Sina's microblog site, bloggers used pictures and
English to avoid censorship. SongLingge#2 [posted a picture of Liu Xiaobo and
wrote](http://t.sina.com.cn/1776459713/wr0qeq6jsy):

> 分享图片： 这位越来越像圣雄甘地的家伙，就是刚刚获得2010年度the Nobel Peace Prize 的“中国圣僧”。

Photo sharing: This guy looks more and more like the holy monk Gandhi, he is
the Chinese holy monk who was just awarded the 2010 Nobel Peace Prize.

[![](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2010/10/lxb1.jpg)](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2010/10/lxb1.jpg)

Fan Zhixing, a reporter [urged his colleagues to record the history made
today](http://t.sina.com.cn/1454122663/Bh0qeq1By6):

> 记者同仁们，键盘在你手下，你们准备怎样来记录这一天，让这一天在被提起的时候，光芒与阴影交相反映呢？

Reporter colleagues, your keyboards are under your control. How are you
prepared to record today? When today is mentioned again in the future, we will
be able to see the light and shadow reflecting each other.

Huang Yangda wrote ([post since
deleted](http://t.sina.com.cn/1713968355/Bh0qeq1nR4)):

> 聽說拿了和平獎的是個中國人，卻不是黨人啊！因為他好像被奪去了政治權利。忘了他叫什麼名字，怎樣寫都寫不出來。

Juding from hearsay, the guy who awarded the Peace Prize is Chinese, but he is
not a party member! Because his political rights have been taken away. I have
forgotten his name, don't know how to write it.

Chongtou Yip retold the news with [an
allegory](http://t.sina.com.cn/1668008312/wr0qeq2o66):

> 从前有一位蛮不讲理、暴力的父亲，因为儿子不听话，所以把他毒打及关在房间內。可是，学校老师同学都表扬他，邻里都赞许他，这位父亲能不看到自己的过失吗？

Once upon a time, there was a very violent and unreasonable father who beat
and locked up his son in the room. However, at school all teachers and
students praised the son. All the neighbors also praised the son. How can the
father not see his own fault?

廖偉棠 [posted a poem and dedicated it to all political
detainees](http://t.sina.com.cn/1694438127/Bh0qeq4t7x):

> 致一个被囚禁者（116°46′E ，39°92′N） 莫须有的罪也莫须判 他们想把你在每一篇檄文中删除 使你成为真正的莫须有先生。
> 他们从永定河中捞出空气冻成的白骨 给你做了莫须有的铁窗、莫须有的枷锁， 却没想到你从白骨里蘸墨 画出了梦里人焚烧的春闺余烬。

To a detainee (116°46′E, 39°92′N): A crime without any reason cannot be
sentenced. They want to delete you in every declaration. And turn you into Mr.
non-existence. They extracted the air from Yongding river and froze it into
white bones. Which were turned into meaningless iron bars on the window and
ankle chains. They never imagined that you could pour ink onto the white
bones. And paint the ashes of spring dream of the dreamer.

