![](https://globalvoices.org/wp-content/uploads/2017/09/Screen-
Shot-2017-09-03-at-18.05.20-761x600.jpg)

Atvatan Turkmenistan reports on the Starbucks that isn't. Screenshot of
[website](http://www.atavatan-turkmenistan.com/news_details.php?news_id=OTM5).

**_The following is a[partner post](http://www.eurasianet.org/node/84926) from
[EurasiaNet.org](http://www.eurasianet.org/). Republished with permission._**

In a plush shopping center in Turkmenistan's capital, Ashgabat, a brand new
cafe bearing the name “Starbucks” has sent tongues wagging with its authentic-
seeming decor and 15-manat Frappuccinos .

Predictably, however, it isn’t the real deal.

Social media was briefly
[stirred](https://twitter.com/search?q=Starbucks%20turkmenistan&src=typd) by
the revelation that a Starbucks had sprung up in a mall that was opened by
autocrat ruler Gurbanguly Berdymukhamedov with great fanfare last year.

A Turkmenistan-focused news website [provided](http://www.atavatan-
turkmenistan.com/news_details.php?news_id=OTM5) a photo of the cafe — parked
in a leafy corner of the the white-marble-dominated Bagtyyarlik mall —
unambigiously bearing the Seattle-based company's logos and look.

Armenia’s ambassador to Turkmenistan also took a snap, hailing it as the
[advent of
globalization](https://twitter.com/v_hunanyan/status/899987868285902849) in
the country viewed as one of the world’s most isolated.

Alas, Starbucks told EurasiaNet.org that it had nothing to do with the global
retail chain.

“I can confirm that we do not have a store in Turkmenistan,” Starbucks
corporate communications director Jaime Riley wrote in emailed comments.

The store also fails to appear on Starbucks’ store locator app, which tracks
24,000 stores in 70 different countries. (The company does have a strong
presence in neighboring Kazakhstan).

At the fake “Starbucks” cafe, a “grande” cappuccino costs 12.50 manats, more
then twice its average cost in other trendy Ashgabat cafes.

While that equals more than $3.40 at the manat’s official rate with the
dollar, it is worth noting that the dollar is fetching more than 6 manats on
the black market.

The country’s current economic crisis, brought on by sagging global prices for
energy commodities, has led to a sharp spike in the price of imported goods.
So depending on the type of coffee and other products the would-be-Starbucks
is bringing in, prices at the till might just reflect the weakened purchasing
power of the local currency.

International trademarks are often abused in ex-Soviet Central Asia. In
Kyrgyzstan’s capital, Bishkek, a restaurant using the TGI Friday's brand name
closed in 2014 after receiving a threatening letter from the US restaurant
chain. The same city boasts a Whatsapp cafe and a Burger Kiиg, which deserves
credit for its innovative use of Cyrillic to obfuscate a clear violation of
copyright.

Turkmenistan is a signatory to the [Berne convention
](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Berne_Convention), which protects copyright to
some degree. But unlike Kyrgyzstan, it is not a member of the World Trade
Organization, which treats intellectual property very seriously.

What is most interesting in the Turkmen case is the ownership of the cafe in
question.

Given that Berdymukhamedov was at the opening ceremony for the Bagtyyarlik
mall, it is clearly an site of some economic prominence. Moreover, few
businessmen can make hay in the closed-off country without patronage from the
state, prompting the question of who might be acting as political cover for
the cafe.

The would-be-Starbucks opened ahead of the 2017 Asian Martial Arts and Indoor
Games, which Turkmenistan hosts later this month. Unfortunately, the ersatz
Starbucks does not appear to be especially close to the ersatz Olympic Village
built for the games, so coffee-loving sports fans will have some way to
schlepp for an ersatz Seattle coffee bar experience.

