[![The Italian Navy has launched a recruitment campaign not in Italian, but in
English. From Marina Militare's Facebook page.
](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/be-cool-and-join-
the-
navy-800x535.jpg)](https://www.facebook.com/MarinaMilitareOfficialPage/photos/pb.621659044516854.-2207520000.1425649054./1028182253864529/?type=3&theater)

The Italian Navy has launched a recruitment campaign not in Italian, but in
English. From Marina Militare's Facebook page.

_This article and radio report by[David
Leveille](http://www.pri.org/people/david-leveille) for [The
World](http://www.pri.org/programs/the-world) originally [appeared on
PRI.org](http://www.pri.org/stories/2015-03-02/some-italians-are-demanding-
their-english-speaking-leaders-say-it-italian) on March 2, 2015, and is
republished as part of a content-sharing agreement._

Matteo Renzi, Italy's youngest-ever prime minister, is getting some sharp
criticism — but not for his “urgently needed” political and economic reforms.
Instead, Italians are angry over his liberal use of English terms.

Renzi has introduced a “jobs act,” and uses English words like “benchmark” and
“hashtag” in his presentations. He even insists his cabinet ministers speak
English, a first for Italian politics. And the trend may be catching on:
Italy's navy has launched a new recruitment campaign using English-language
slogans “Be Cool and Join the Navy.”

All of this English is going over poorly with a growing number of Italians,
who are urging Italian politicians to “say it in Italian.”

“We have a big labor reform underway,” says Beppe Severgnini, a columnist for
the daily Italian newspaper Corriere della Sera. “In Italian its ‘riforma del
lavoro’. Why on Earth do they have to call it a Jobs Act?”

Severgnini says the use of English is like a throwback to the Middle Ages,
when politicians spoke Latin if they wanted to hide what was really going on
from ordinary people. “English is like saccharine, not sugar, saccharine that
you put in the Italian political public coffee,” he argues. “It’s something
that so sweetens things that people don’t quite understand what is going on.”

Another example is ongoing discussion around government overspending. “So we
want to proceed with the proper spending review, but why don’t you say in
Italian, for the Italian voters, ‘la revisione della spesa?'” Severgnini asks.
“Simple, clear — but no, they call it ‘a spending review,’ which many
Italians, by the way, don’t know how to pronounce.”

“Why on Earth do you do that?” is a question Severgnini has posed to his
politician friends. He says they usually reply that it’s a better way to
communicate with Europeans, or that most Italians understand simple English
words like “jobs” and “act.”

Severgnini's response? “I don’t buy it,” he says. “I love Italian. … What I
don't like is mixing languages, and mixing in a way that shows an inferiority
complex, sloppiness and laziness. … I say mouse when I use my computer, but
everything else, I say we have a great language, so be sensible and use
Italian.”

