![](https://globalvoices.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/05/1.1-800x533.jpeg)

Outraged by the police raids on nightclubs, thousands of clubbers and liberal
activists took control of the road outside parliament and held an impromptu
dance club May 12 and 13. Some wore chamomile flowers in their hair. Photo by
Giorgi Lomsadze for Eurasianet.

**_The following is a[partner post ](https://eurasianet.org/s/georgia-
protests-nightlife-against-nationalists)from
[Eurasianet.org](http://www.eurasianet.org/) written by [Giorgi
Lomsadze](https://eurasianet.org/people/Giorgi-Lomsadze). Republished with
permission._**

Georgia's fierce culture wars escalated over the weekend after a heavy-handed
police raid on a nightclub was followed by a tense standoff between defenders
of the capital’s lively, libertine nightlife and radical far-right groups.

A massive police presence barely managed to keep the peace between the two
competing demonstrations in central Tbilisi on May 13, as protests against the
[anti-drug raids](https://www.rferl.org/a/georgian-police-raid-on-clubs-
triggers-protests-in-capital/29223031.html) on two nightclubs exploded into a
larger conflict about personal freedom and national identity.

“We were on the cusp of civil confrontation,” President Giorgi Margvelashvili
said at a press conference the following day.

At the center of the conflict was the nightclub Bassiani, which has gained
international renown as [one of the top clubs in
Europe](https://www.hostelworld.com/blog/best-nightclubs-in-the-world/) and
one of the main draws to the city for hip young tourists from around the
world.

In Georgia, Bassiani has been in the vanguard of cultural revolution, helping
create an underground of cosmopolitan and progressive youth opposed to the
often nationalistic, xenophobic and homophobic environment in the rest of the
country. Emphasizing its role in Georgia's culture wars, the club even borrows
its name from a famous 13th-century battle.

Over the last several years, a cultural gap has been widening among Georgians.
In a relatively short period of time, pockets of the country have dramatically
changed: Tbilisi's rapidly developing center is now a playground for liberal
young people, with attitudes on [sexuality](https://eurasianet.org/s/georgias-
condemned-condoms), [gender roles](https://eurasianet.org/s/georgian-women-
march-against-misogyny-and-racism), and even
[diet](https://eurasianet.org/s/georgia-attack-on-vegan-caf-opens-new-front-
in-culture-war) that are far different than that of the mainstream.
Immigrants, including many darker-skinned people from the Middle East, South
Asia, or Africa, are now a common sight in Tbilisi. And a growing movement
seeks the [liberalization of drug laws](https://eurasianet.org/s/georgia-mass-
marijuana-planting-party-planned-for-new-years), albeit focused on marijuana
rather than harder club drugs.

This has made some conservative Georgians uneasy, and has led to a
[backlash](https://eurasianet.org/s/georgians-march-against-muslim-
immigrants), including from a growing militant far-right movement.

The latest confrontation began following a string of deaths of clubgoers,
blamed on overdoses of recreational mephedrone-based drugs, earlier in the
month.

Police responded in the wee hours of May 12 by storming Bassiani and another
club, Café Gallery, [dragging
partiers](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=3IrjFIE8guY) out and detaining
several. “We … have 20 video clips of drug sales in clubs. We were forced to
raid the clubs,” [said](http://agenda.ge/news/100608/eng) Interior Minister
Giorgi Gakharia.

Many criticized the crackdown as a publicity stunt and it later transpired
that eight people arrested for possession of drugs were detained outside the
club premises, apparently rendering the heavy-handed raids unnecessary.

Outraged by the raids, thousands of clubbers occupied the street in front of
parliament on Saturday afternoon. Dancing to electronic music blasting from
large speakers, the partier-protesters turned downtown into a dance club for
the rest of the weekend. Demanding the resignations of the interior and prime
ministers, the protesters held posters reading “Dancing Is Not a Crime,”
“Don’t Beat Me, Dance With Me,” and “If We Can’t Go to Bassiani, Bassiani Will
Come to Us.”

> Demonstration proceeds in front of the Georgian Parliament where protesters
> dance to electronic music after yesterday's raid on nightclubs
> [#Bassiani](https://twitter.com/hashtag/Bassiani?src=hash&ref_src=twsrc%5Etfw)
> [#tbilisi](https://twitter.com/hashtag/tbilisi?src=hash&ref_src=twsrc%5Etfw)
> [pic.twitter.com/mgBAQhOatf](https://t.co/mgBAQhOatf)
>
> — OC Media (@OCMediaorg) [May 12,
> 2018](https://twitter.com/OCMediaorg/status/995365217143001088?ref_src=twsrc%5Etfw)

Our problem is with the police state… that we have been living in for years
and the May 12 raids were another testimony of it,” Beka Tsikarishvili, one of
the organizers of the rally who leads the White Noise Movement, a grass-roots
coalition [pushing](https://eurasianet.org/s/georgia-innovation-advocacy-and-
drug-decriminalization) for liberalized drug policy, told the crowd.

Prominent European DJs spoke out in solidarity. “Bassiani is my heart, it
makes me sad to see my sisters and brothers treated like criminals,” Swedish
DJ Joel Mull [wrote](https://www.facebook.com/joelmull/) on Facebook. “Stay
strong Bassiani,” said German techno artist Ben Klock.

Things went south on Sunday, when the clubs’ defenders kept up their protests
and ultranationalist groups Georgian March and Georgia Idea gathered nearby.

> Far-right counter-rally gathered near 9 April Square after being prevented
> by police from going to the parliament where
> [#Bassiani](https://twitter.com/hashtag/Bassiani?src=hash&ref_src=twsrc%5Etfw)
> [#CafeGallery](https://twitter.com/hashtag/CafeGallery?src=hash&ref_src=twsrc%5Etfw)
> protest is being held
> [#Tbilisi](https://twitter.com/hashtag/Tbilisi?src=hash&ref_src=twsrc%5Etfw)
> [pic.twitter.com/AQylLaTIts](https://t.co/AQylLaTIts)
>
> — OC Media (@OCMediaorg) [May 13,
> 2018](https://twitter.com/OCMediaorg/status/995646531767357440?ref_src=twsrc%5Etfw)

![](https://globalvoices.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/05/40-800x533.jpg)

On May 13, far-right groups gathered for a rival rally. They condemned
nightclubs as places for drug abuse and sexual deviance. They sang the
national anthem, hurled verbal abuse and tried to physically assault the
clubbers. Photo by Giorgi Lomsadze for Eurasianet.

The rival camps’ fashions were as far apart as their ideologies, with colorful
outfits and piercings dominating one group and close cropped heads the other.
Shouting verbal abuse and homophobic slurs, the far-right youth repeatedly
tried to break through police cordons as the other side danced and played
electronic music in defiance.

“Bassiani [expletive] off!” some in the nationalist camp screamed. “They are
just a bunch of drug dealers, sluts and homosexuals,” one far-right activist
wearing a mask told Eurasianet at the event.

Rows of regular and riot police formed a human wall between the two rallies on
central Rustaveli Avenue. Police used city buses to form additional barriers
and had water cannon trucks at the ready in case the confrontation got
violent.

Both sides stood their ground until Gakharia, the interior minister, showed up
after midnight to apologize for the excessive force used in the club raids.

“Let me begin with apologies,” Gakharia said, promoting peals of applause from
one rally and catcalls from the other. “I apologize not just on my personal
behalf, but on behalf of any interior ministry officials who may have
aggravated you or whose actions put your safety at risk,” he said, offering to
sit down with protesters to discuss ways to revise the country's [punitive
policies](https://eurasianet.org/s/opposition-mounts-to-georgias-war-on-drugs)
on drug use.

The ravers agreed to disperse but police struggled to secure their safe exit.
The radical groups became increasingly violent, clashing with police and
screaming threats.

Order was eventually restored but questions remain about how to deal with drug
use – parliament members promised to produce new drug policy legislation in
two weeks – and the growing cultural divide.

