![](https://globalvoices.org/wp-content/uploads/2015/10/Cannabis_TT.jpg)

Trinidad and Tobago flag image, public domain. Cannabis leaf by Oren neu dag
(CC BY-SA 3.0), via Wikimedia Commons. Images remixed by Georgia Popplewell

**By Nazma Muller**

The prohibition against cannabis—or marijuana, as the dried form of the plant
is commonly known—was introduced in Trinidad and Tobago and the rest of the
English-speaking Caribbean during the colonial era by the [crown
colony](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Crown_colony) government. It was
reinforced by the signing of the Single Convention on Narcotic Drugs of 1961,
an international treaty to prohibit the production and supply of certain
(nominally narcotic) drugs, and of drugs with similar effects except under
licence for specific purposes, such as medical treatment and research.

Today, as Trinidad and Tobago celebrates its 56th anniversary of
[independence](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Trinidad_and_Tobago_Independence_Act_1962),
this convention and all its derivatives, including cannabis’ classification by
the World Health Organization as a Schedule I drug, continue to be used as
obstacles to any kind of legal reform of our drug laws. This even as the
illegal drug trade wreaks havoc in the country, taking hundreds of lives and
corrupting the police force, the Coast Guard, the Defence Force, and customs
officials with lucrative bribes and payoffs. Even as hundreds die from a
cancer crisis rooted in our industrial/consumerist lifestyle, thousands are
arrested and jailed for possession of cannabis while a corrupt, overburdened
justice system collapses.

For Trinidad and Tobago, currently facing [the sudden
shutdown](https://newsday.co.tt/2018/08/28/no-title-19/) of a major oil
refinery at Petrotrin, this is a sobering moment, but one that has long been
on the cards. And there is little time to wallow in regret. The country’s
citizens are used to crying over spilt billions but there isn’t much left in
the Treasury, and we are going to have to think fast as we become forcibly
“independent” of the oil/gas cushion on which we have been floating for the
last 100 or so years.

For decades, economists have been urging the government to diversify the
economy. Well, they have no choice now. And one obvious option would be
cannabis. I mean, if Canada feels they need to legalise recreational cannabis,
who are we as a small tropical island to turn up our noses at the green gold?

In the lead-up to the last general elections in 2015 both the current prime
minister of Trinidad and Tobago, Dr. Keith Rowley, and his predecessor, Kamla
Persad-Bissessar, both responded to questions about the decriminalization of
cannabis by saying that they would leave the matter to the regional body
[CARICOM](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Caribbean_Community), which
established [the Regional Commission on
Marijuana](https://caricom.org/marijuana-commission) in 2014.

The members of the commission, led by [Professor Rose-Marie Belle
Antoine](https://caricom.org/marijuana-commission/view-commissioner/professor-
rose-marie-belle-antoine), dean of the Faculty of Law at the Trinidad campus
of the University of the West Indies, are among the most distinguished
practitioners in their respective fields. The deputy chair is Professor
Wendell Abel, a consultant psychiatrist at the University Hospital of the West
Indies and the head of Psychiatry at the Faculty of Medical Sciences at the
University of the West Indies’ Jamaica campus. Professor Abel has worked in
the field of mental health for many years in Jamaica and the Caribbean and
holds a Master’s in Public Health from Johns Hopkins University, among other
qualifications. Professor Abel has published several peer-reviewed book
chapters, technical papers and journal articles focusing on mental health and
health policy issues such as suicide, depression and community mental health
services. He has been at the forefront of leading empirical research in the
Caribbean on the mental health effects of cannabis. Another commissioner is
Esther Best, manager of the National Drug Council of Trinidad and of the
country’s overarching drug policy and strategy. She has represented the
country and the region at a number of important international fora on drug
reform and policy.

The Regional Commission released its [final
report](https://caricom.org/marijuana-commission/view/final-report-report-of-
the-caricom-regional-commission-on-marijuana) to the public on August 3. “On
balance, after evaluating the scientific data and testimonies from the public,
the Commission is of the view that the proven medical benefits of
cannabis/marijuana in several areas outweigh the risks,” the report states.
According to the report, which is entitled “Waiting to Exhale—Safeguarding our
Future Through Responsible Social-Legal Policy on Marijuana”:

> “This finding is consistent with those of numerous other national bodies/
> Commissions in the region and globally and that of international bodies, the
> most influential of which have labelled the current legal regime ‘redundant’
> and ‘obstructionist’. . . . The scientific data supports law reform to
> permit the use of marijuana, but in a controlled regulatory environment. A
> public health, rights-based, non-prohibitionist approach focused on
> high‐risk users and practices – similar to the approach favoured with
> alcohol and tobacco – allows for more control over the risk factors
> associated with cannabis‐related harms than the current, ineffective
> prohibition, which heightens health risks and induces social harms.”

The report recommends three possible options individual governments could take
toward implementing its findings: decriminalise, legalise with state
production, or legalise with private sector production and state oversight.

The government of Trinidad and Tobago is well positioned to harness the
immense technical capacity and infrastructure of this oil and gas producing
nation to become a leader and key mover in a CARICOM-wide cannabis and hemp
industry. We have within CARICOM all the conditions and expertise required for
technical collaboration and for the cultivation of sufficient volumes of
cannabis and hemp. And unique to this region is a nearly century-old
indigenous religious and social
movement—[Rastafari](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Rastafari)—in which
marijuana use plays a central role, an activity for which adherents have
unjustly paid the price. A developed cannabis industry could meet the medical
needs of our people, create value-added products that can be sold intra-
regionally (nutraceuticals, paper hempcrete, etc), create jobs and raise the
standard of living for the working-class and marginalised people of the
region. That would be a truly independent move.

**_Nazma Muller is a Trinidad-born member of the Rastafari movement. She is
the leader of the Caribbean Collective for Justice, which advocates
environmental and social justice for the entire region._**

