Two days after Kosovo's declaration of independence in spite of Serbia's
opposition, [the debate](http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/europe/7250764.stm) about
the merits of recognising it as a state is still raging. According to the
website [Kosova Thanks You](http://www.kosovothanksyou.com/), so far 17
countries have recognized the new Republic of Kosovo and 34 others are ready
to do so. Within the European Union, countries such as France, UK, Germany or
Italy have recognized it, while others such as Slovakia and Spain [have
strongly opposed it](http://www.iht.com/articles/ap/2008/02/18/europe/EU-
Kosovo.php) as they consider that the declaration does not respect
international law.

However, Spain vehemently [protested to
Russia](http://afp.google.com/article/ALeqM5gq72dRpEdRJkR5oLmcu5mJyIswkA) a
few days ago over remarks by President Vladimir Putin in which he likened the
situation in Kosovo to that in Spain's Basque and Catalan regions. For the
Spanish government, Kosovo has nothing to do either with
[Catalonia](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Catalonia) or with the [Basque
Country](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Basque_Country_%28autonomous_community%29).

[![Catalonia next state](https://www.globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2008/02/catalonia-next-
state.jpg)](https://www.globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2008/02/catalonia-next-state.jpg "Catalonia next state")  
_Photo from the blog[Catalonia, the next state in
Europe](http://cataloniathenextstate.blogspot.com/)_

[Bloggers in
Catalonia](http://www.bitacoles.net/cerca/?cerca=Kosovo&Submit=Cerca) have
been debating the issue intensely during the last few days. While supporters
of an independent Catalonia have welcomed Kosovo's independence with campaigns
like [adding a
banner](http://www.e-criteri.cat/index.cfm?plana=participa.cfm?ID=19)
recognizing the new state or [including the title “Today Kosovo, Tomorrow
Catalonia”](http://fantassin.blogspot.com/2008/02/today-kosovo-tomorrow-
catalonia.html) in as many blogs as possible, other Catalan bloggers agree
with the position of the Spanish government.
[](http://votant.blogspot.com/2008/02/kosovo-catalunya.html)

_Diari del votant anònim_

