In early May, [the Japanese government
announced](http://www.yomiuri.co.jp/dy/national/20070502TDY03003.htm) that it
will take a special measure to recognise children born within 300 days of
their mother's divorce, given that the mothers became pregnant after divorce.
This announcement came after a group of divorced women with children raised
the issue on the current civil law, sparking debate in the National Diet.

Section 2 of Article 772 of [the Japanese Civil
Code](http://www.crnjapan.com/japan_law/laws/en/book4_relatives.html),
implemented in 1898, stipulates that a child born 200 days or more after its
mother's marriage took place, or within 300 days after its mother's marriage
was dissolved or terminated, is considered to have been conceived during her
previous marriage. This means that the child must be added to the
[_koseki_](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Koseki) of its mother's previous
husband, or family registry, which causes tremendous distress for the mothers
and other people involved. In order to prove that the child is not
biologically related to the former husband, this former husband has to testify
before the court. Many of these mothers avoid contact with their former
husbands, or do not want their children to be registered in their former
husbands’ registries. In such cases, children do not have _koseki_.

The Ministry of Justice estimates that approximately 3,000 children are born
under these circumstances every year. Those children who do not have family
registries cannot receive various social services such as health care and
pension programs, and are not issued passports.

Following the government's announcement, the issue has been extensively
debated on many blog sites. [An anonymous
blogger](http://ninteikodomoen.seesaa.net/article/41206322.html) argues that
the law does not need to be changed.

>
> もし、新しい旦那の子供だと言い張るならみなさん、状況をよく考えて下さい。その女性は、離婚後すぐ（翌日くらいには？）彼氏が出来、妊娠し結婚しています。そんなことありえますか？明らかに離婚前に不貞行為をおかしているようにしか思えません。侵していないとしても、離婚後すぐに妊娠というのはいかがなものでしょうか？自業自得としか思えません。この法律になんの不具合があるのでしょうか？

If a woman insists that her kid is her new husband's, then think about the
situation carefully. The woman had a new boyfriend right after (maybe like the
day after) her divorce, got pregnant and remarried. Does it sound possible?
What is clear is that this woman was conducting acts of infidelity before her
divorce. Even if not, what's up with getting pregnant so soon after divorce? I
can only think that this is their own fault. Is there anything wrong with this
law?

>
> もう一件、女性の再婚禁止期間の短縮も検討されているみたいですが１８０→１００日たった３ヶ月で再婚を決意するようなスピード結婚って、これも再離婚の可能性がありますよね？おたがいをよく知らないで結婚するって・・知った仲だと言い張るならこれも離婚前の不貞行為が感じられます。そんな法律じゃいけないと思うのです。むしろ、雁字搦めにするべきだと思います。例えば、子連れ離婚した場合は、再婚できないとか。ニュースで流れる虐待の１００％近く、再婚家庭や同居家庭です。あきらかに、子連れ再婚にはハイリスクがあります。なんの罪もない子供が、信じていた実の親に裏切られ虐待を受けるのですよ。この、状況に方があきらかに深刻ではないのでしょうか？

Another point, apparently the period women are not allowed to get remarried
has been shortened from 180 days to 100 days. Getting remarried in three
months will propbably end up in another divorce, won't it? Marrying someone
you don't really know that well… If they insist that they know each other
well, then I would suspect a case of infidelity. This kind of law is not good
enough. In fact, I think they should be restrained. For instance, if a woman
gets divorced and she has children, then she shouldn't be able to remarry, or
something like that. Almost 100% of all cases of abuse we see on TV news
happen in households with divorced parents or unmarried couples living
together. Clearly, there is a risk in remarrying with children. Innocent
children are betrayed and abused by their own parents whom they trust. Isn't
this situation much more serious?

On the other hand, [Toranekojiji](http://mercury07.blog94.fc2.com/blog-
entry-42.html) writes that the law is behind the times and calls for
affirmitive relief.

> 離婚後に生まれた子どもの父親を定める「３００日規定」は、明治時代にできた民法の内容をそのまま受け継いでいる。  
>  一般的な妊娠期間を考慮したものだ。しかし、離婚後の妊娠でも早産で「３００日」に足りないと、前夫の子になってしまう。
>
>
> 離婚がすんなり決まるとは限らず、夫からの暴力で逃げていたり、離婚協議が長引くケースも少なくない。妊娠の時期より離婚成立が遅れると、再婚相手の子でも、別れた夫の戸籍に入る。

This “300 day rule”, which determines the father of a child born after its
mother's divorce, inherits the substance of the Civil Code written in the
Meiji era. It is based on the average gestation period. However, even in cases
of conception after a divorce and preterm delivery, short of “300 days”, a
child is regarded as an offspring of her former husband's.

