[![](https://globalvoices.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/05/1200px-
Police_notice_Tibet_1993.jpg)](https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/f/f7/Police_notice%2C_Tibet%2C_1993.jpg)

“Police attention: No distributing any unhealthy thoughts or objects.” A
trilingual (Tibetan – Chinese – English) sign above the entrance to a small
café in Nyalam Town, Tibet, 1993. By John Hill. CC BY-SA 3.0.

_Written by Pong Lai_

The 29th anniversary of the bloody suppression of the Tiananmen Square
demonstrations is approaching. On June 4, 1989, Chinese army forces repeatedly
opened fire on a student-led movement demanding freedom of expression and
political reform away from corruption and single-party rule.

At the time, the Chinese Red Cross estimated that 2,700 civilians were killed,
but other sources point to a much higher toll. A confidential US government
document, revealed in 2014, reported that a Chinese internal assessment
estimated that 10,454 civilians had died. Recently, a different report written
by the then-British ambassador to China was declassified; it
[quotes](https://www.independent.co.uk/news/world/asia/tiananmen-square-
massacre-death-toll-secret-cable-british-ambassador-1989-alan-
donald-a8126461.html) a source from China's State Council who said that the
minimum estimation of civilians killed is 10,000.

Authorities also arrested hundreds of people in connection with the Tiananmen
Square protests. But these were not the first prisoners of conscience to enter
Chinese jails — and they were not the last. On the anniversary of the
crackdown, many remember those who have been put in prison for expressing
their beliefs.

There is no official record of how many political prisoners there are in China
— the Chinese government has denied that it has any.

However, the [Political Prisoner
Database](https://www.cecc.gov/about/frequently-asked-questions) of the United
States’ Congressional-Executive Commission on China (CECC), which has tracked
cases in China since 1981, provides important details about the situation. A
cross-reading of this data with mainland Chinese political history in the past
three decades can also help us to develop a clearer picture of the state of
human rights in China.

### Who are China's political prisoners?

The CECC defines political prisoner as:

> an individual detained for exercising his or her human rights under
> international law, such as peaceful assembly, freedom of religion, freedom
> of association, free expression, including the freedom to advocate peaceful
> social or political change, and to criticize government policy or government
> officials.

The database has 9,116 cases of political prisoners in mainland China from
1981 through 2018. However, the commission only began keeping records in 1987,
thus [the actual number of cases](https://www.cecc.gov/ppd-frequently-asked-
questions-faqs) may be higher than their records show.

Most prisoners in the database have been released, but [more than
1,000](https://www.cecc.gov/sites/chinacommission.house.gov/files/documents/CECC%20Pris%20List_20171105_1414.pdf)
were believed to be behind bars as of 2017.

Taking a look at their profiles, there were more male than female prisoners
(see Figure 1).

![](https://globalvoices.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/05/figure-1-gender-
political-prisoners-china.jpg)

Figure 1. Gender distribution of political prisoners in China from 1981 to
2017. Data used in graph from the Political Prisoner Database of the United
States’ Congressional-Executive Commission on China.

Nearly half of those behind bars (4,012) were Tibetans. With a population of
just six million Tibetans in China, where the total population is more than 1
billion, the number of detained Tibetans is disproportionately high.

Only about half of the records include information on a prisoner's age at the
time of their detention. Of the available data, the youngest political
prisoner was just 6 years old at the moment of detention, while the oldest was
84. Around 65% were detained between the ages of 20 and 45 years old (Figure
2).

![](https://globalvoices.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/05/figure-2-age-at-
moment-of-detention-china.jpg)

Figure 2. Age of political prisoners in China from 1981 to 2017 at the moment
of detention. Data used in graph from the Political Prisoner Database of the
United States’ Congressional-Executive Commission on China.

### Dissent and repression in Tibet

Figure 3 shows the number of political prisoners detained by year, and the
events to which their detentions corresponded. We can see several significant
peaks.

![](https://globalvoices.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/05/figure-3-political-
prisoners-detained-by-year-china.jpg)

Figure 3. Number of political prisoners in China detained by year, with
important historical moments annotated. Colors correspond to the most powerful
figure in China at the time: red for Deng; orange for Jiang; green for Hu; and
blue for Xi. Data used in graph from the Political Prisoner Database of the
United States’ Congressional-Executive Commission on China.

The first peak occurred in 1989 during [Deng
Xiaoping](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Deng_Xiaoping)‘s era (represented in
red) and corresponds with the Tiananmen Square crackdown on June 4, 1989.

The second and third peaks in 1993 and 1995 are mainly related to rising
[repression of political
dissent](http://www.refworld.org/docid/3ae6a9d1c.html) in Tibet, which is home
to an independence movement. Figure 4 shows that from 1987 on, the number of
Tibetans detained began to increase.

Forty-four pro-independence demonstrations were reported in Tibet in 1993, and
about 400 Tibetans were imprisoned. In 1994, about 19 demonstrations took
place in Tibet, and the number of Tibetan political prisoners increased to
628. Based on a senior Chinese justice ministry official's report in January
1995, 200 out of 800 detained Tibetans had been found guilty of “counter-
revolutionary crimes.”

![](https://globalvoices.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/05/figure-4-ethnicity-of-
people-detained-china.jpg)

Figure 4. Political prisoners in China by ethnicity. Data used in graph from
the Political Prisoner Database of the United States’ Congressional-Executive
Commission on China.

The Dalai Lama, who lives in exile, is considered the political and spiritual
leader of Tibet. In 1995, he recognized the 11th incarnation of the [Panchen
Lama](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Panchen_Lama), one of the most important
figures in Tibetan Buddhism. However, the government-sanctioned search
committee chose another person from their own list, and the Chinese government
took Gedhun Ghoekyi Nyima, who was recognized by Dalai Lama as the Panchen
Lama, into “protective custody.” [Hundreds of monks and nuns](http://xizang-
zhiye.org/1994-1995-%E8%A5%BF%E8%97%8F%E4%BA%BA%E6%AC%8A%E7%8B%80%E6%B3%81/)
were arrested and detained because they did not recognize the Panchen Lama
chosen by Beijing.

The fourth peak occurred in 2008, when China was preparing to host the
country's first Olympics. A large number of protests occurred in that year,
[especially in Tibet](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/2008_Tibetan_unrest) (see
Figure 4). Tibetans used the moment in the international spotlight to
demonstrate against Chinese [economic
policies](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/China_Western_Development) and
[development](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Qinghai%E2%80%93Tibet_railway)
that had brought on inflation, environmental pollution and land seizures in
the region. Beijing's tightening of ideological control in Tibet, in which the
education system taught Tibetans to [denounce the Dalai
Lama](https://www.cecc.gov/publications/commission-analysis/monk-dies-
following-dispute-with-patriotic-education-instructors) and pledge loyalty to
the China government, was also a point of contention.

In response to the unrest, China clamped down. Based on China's Supreme
People's Court [annual work report for
2009](https://www.duihuahrjournal.org/2010/07/supreme-peoples-court-work-
report.html), the number of cases involving charges of “endangering state
security” rose to around 760 in 2009, compared with just 460 in 2008. The CECC
database shows the total number of political prisoners in 2008 and 2009 as
being 1,220.

![](https://globalvoices.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/05/figure-5-issue-
related-to-detention-china.jpg)

Figure 5. The principal issue driving detentions of political prisoners in
China. Data used in graph from the Political Prisoner Database of the United
States’ Congressional-Executive Commission on China.

### Religion, politics and thought

The peak from 1999 to 2002 is due mainly to the crackdown on religious group
Falun Gong (see “FG” in Figure 5) and political parties.

The Chinese government began repressing the public practice of Falun Gong in
the mid-1990s. In 1999, about 10,000 Falun Gong practitioners gathered near
the central government compound in Beijing demanding legal recognition. The
protest resulted in the arrest of at least 111 members, according to a report
from [Human Rights Watch](https://www.hrw.org/news/1999/11/09/china-uses-rule-
law-justify-falun-gong-crackdown).

In 1998, a group of democracy activists attempted to register a new political
party named [Democracy Party of
China](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Democracy_Party_of_China). Active members
were then either arrested or exiled.

The rise in the number of political prisoners between 2009 and 2010 might be
related to the [Charter 08](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Charter_08) movement
launched by Liu Xiaobo, a Nobel Peace Prize laureate, and signed by hundreds
of public intellectuals demanding political reform and a guarantee of human
rights.

We can also see an increased number of detentions in 2014 and 2015, which
might be related to Hong Kong's pro-democracy [Umbrella
Movement](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Umbrella_Movement) and the [July 9
crackdown of human right
lawyers](https://www.amnesty.org/en/latest/campaigns/2016/07/one-year-since-
chinas-crackdown-on-human-rights-lawyers/) in 2015 (see the blue in Figure 3).
During the Umbrella Movement, [more than 200 citizens in mainland
China](https://hka8964.wordpress.com/2015/11/20/20151225lxb/) were reported to
be arrested for expressing support for this movement. And on July 9, 2015,
about 300 human rights lawyers and activists were arrested and interrogated.

### Prisoners in their own homes

The database is said to underestimate the number of political prisoners
because some are not detained in a prison cell, but at their own house or in
secret [“black
jail”](https://twitter.com/zhaoyan818/status/999865688402595842) without
trial.

Xiaodan Wang's father is a practitioner of Falun Gong, and he had been in
prison for 15 years. Wang said in [a
statement](https://www.cecc.gov/sites/chinacommission.house.gov/files/CECC%20Hearing%20-%20Dissidents%20Who%20Have%20Suffered%20-%207Dec16%20-%20Xiaodan%20Wang.pdf)
to a CECC hearing about her father's condition:

> When he finally made it home it was to video surveillance and neighborhood
> watch programs. Police regularly visited and on “sensitive days” he was
> advised to stay home and out of sight. By no means had he truly returned to
> a normal life.

Similar “neighborhood watch programs” have been applied to well-known
persecuted activists like [Hu
Jia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hu_Jia_\(activist\)).

For decades, Chinese authorities have detained people for their pursuit of
human rights like freedom expression and freedom of religion. They are Tibetan
monks, they are Falung Gong practitioners, they are students, they are
lawyers, and they are survivors of the Tiananmen Square massacre. Their
courage and vision for a better society brought them to jail. But they won't
be forgotten.

