[![Occupy protestors prepare for a final sit-in at the protest area in
Admiralty, Hong Kong, on December 11, 2014, after a judge issued an injunction
allowing police to clear the last remaining camps. Photo by  Jason Langley.
Copyright Demotix](https://globalvoices.org/wp-
content/uploads/2015/09/6454507-800x533.jpg)](http://www.demotix.com/photo/6454507/occupy-
hong-kong-protestors-face-clear-out&popup=1)

Occupy protestors prepare for a final sit-in at the protest area in Admiralty,
Hong Kong, on December 11, 2014, after a judge issued an injunction allowing
police to clear the last remaining camps. Photo by Jason Langley. Copyright
Demotix

A recent paper by [Lokman Tsui](http://lokman.org/), a professor at the School
of Journalism and Communication of the Chinese University of Hong Kong and
longtime member of Global Voices, offers a chilling look at how authorities in
Hong Kong outdid their rivals during the 79-day Occupy Central movement that
hit the city in late 2014.

Thousands of protesters [set up camp in downtown Hong
Kong](https://globalvoices.org/specialcoverage/hong-kongs-umbrella-
revolution/) in September of last year to demand the freedom to choose
candidates in the city's first direct vote of its chief executive in 2017.
China has held that anyone vying for the top position in Hong Kong, a special
administrative region with a certain degree of autonomy from the mainland,
must get majority support from a nominating committee stacked with pro-Beijing
members.

The Occupy movement braved police violence as well as political pressure and
intimidation on and offline from Hong Kong and mainland Chinese authorities
before being driven out by authorities. Technology played an important role in
the movement's organization and coordination, becoming “a critical channel for
communication with the public,” according to Tsui. He described this as “a
fairly typical script” for how technology aids social movements.

In response, the government not only defended itself but, as Tsui states, went
on the offensive. His paper describes the various tactics deployed by the
government and its allies to dissuade and diminish the Occupy movement.

### **Abusing outdated online surveillance laws**

The current surveillance regulation ordinance only refers to telephone, fax
and postal mail, and makes no mention of Internet communications. By
repeatedly refusing to confirm whether its protections extend online, the
government is implying that there are none.

### **Twisting an online fraud protection law to arrest activists**

“One of the more problematic arrests made under [Crimes Ordinance] Section 161
includes charging a 23-year-old from Mongkok with ‘access to computer with
criminal or dishonest intent’ and ‘unlawful assembly’ for allegedly messaging
folks on an online discussion forum to join him in a protest in Mongkok.”

### **De facto online censorship using content removal requests**

“The number of requests for content removal in the four months of October 2014
until February 2015 exceeds the number of requests made in the previous four
years combined.”

### **DDoS attacks on an unprecedented scale**

“The pro-government side was able to hit a series of critical websites with an
unprecedented amount of junk traffic (500 Gigabytes per second), including the
website of the Apple Daily, a pro-democracy newspaper in Hong Kong, and
PopVote, Hong Kong University’s online voting platform, leading Matthew
Prince, the CEO of a hosting company that specializes in DDoS protection, to
call it the ‘largest cyber attack in history.’”

### **Paid “50 cent” Internet commenters**

Pro-government comments flooded online forums, blogs and social media networks
similar to the paid online commentators working for the government elsewhere.
It is generally believed that the pro-government commentators are hired by
political groups sponsored by the Hong Kong government and Beijing.

### **Painting technology-related activities as a US conspiracy**

In the case of Hong Kong, the government was “pushing a narrative of ‘foreign
interference’, a xenophobic narrative that accuses civil society organizations
of being inauthentic, that they are being used and funded by foreign
governments, especially the United States government, who seek to undermine
and weaken China by fomenting revolution in the name of ‘democracy.’”

Tsui ends the paper on a sobering note:

> The Internet still has the potential to empower social movements; they might
> even allow temporary gaps of freedom. But the [Occupy Hong Kong] movement
> suggests that both the Internet and Hong Kong are at a crossroads, that both
> cannot take its freedoms for granted. This is not to say that spaces of
> autonomy and freedom no longer exist online or in Hong Kong; however, they
> are increasingly being marginalized and, at this point in time, are best
> understood as the exceptions rather than the norm.

Tsui's paper, titled “The coming colonization of Hong Kong cyberspace:
government responses to the use of new technologies by the umbrella movement,”
was published in the Chinese Journal of Communication in July 2015. [Read the
full paper on Tsui’s blog.](http://www.lokman.org/2015/09/26/the-coming-
colonization-of-hong-kong-cyberspace/)

