An annual competition has been launched for the public to vote for the seven
best natural wonders of Africa, with the voting [currently
underway](http://sevennaturalwonders.org/category/africa/). The competition is
organized by global grassroots endeavor [Seven Natural
Wonders](http://sevennaturalwonders.org) and at this point includes 12 sites
from across the African continent.

Discover the shortlist and other suggested contenders which didn't make the
cut this year.

**The Okavango Delta,** **Botswana**

[![](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-content/uploads/2012/11/800px-
BotswanaOkavangoHippos-375x201.jpg)](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/File:BotswanaOkavangoHippos.jpg)

Hippos bathing in the Okavango Delta, Botswana, the world's largest inland
delta by John on Wikipedia CC-license-by

The [Okavango Delta](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Okavango_Delta) is the
world's largest inland delta, created from the rains that fill the Okavango
River. The Namibian government has plans to build a hydropower station which
would regulate the Okavango's flow, but environmentalists fear that this
project could destroy most of the fauna and flora in the Delta.

**The Red Sea Reef,** **Egypt, Sudan and Eritrea**

The Red Sea is a seawater inlet of the Indian Ocean, lying between Africa and
Asia. Its Reef stretches over 1,240 miles along the coast of Egypt, Sudan, and
Eritrea and contains more than 1,100 species of fish.

[![Anthia goldfish in the Red Sea from Wikimedia commons. Image in the public
domain.](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-content/uploads/2012/12/800px-
Anthia_goldfish-375x281.jpg)](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Anthia_goldfish.JPG)

Anthia goldfish in the Red Sea from Wikimedia commons. Image in the public
domain.

**Mount Kenya,** **Kenya**

[![Mount Kenya wall](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2012/12/800px-
Mount_Kenya_wall-375x251.jpg)](http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Mount_Kenya_wall.JPG)

Mount Kenya wall by Radu vatcu (CC BY-3.0)

Mount Kenya is the highest mountain in Kenya and the second highest in Africa,
after Kilimanjaro. It was covered by an ice cap for thousands of years. The
Mount Kenya ecosystem provides water directly for over two million people. The
park receives over 16,000 visitors per year.

**The Avenue of the Baobabs,** **Madagascar**

[![Local people on the Avenue of the Baobabs, Morondava,
Madagascar](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-content/uploads/2008/09/800px-
Walking_the_Avenue_of_the_Baobabs-375x249.jpg)](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Walking_the_Avenue_of_the_Baobabs.jpg)

Local people on the Avenue of the Baobabs, Morondava, Madagascar. Image on
Wikimedia Commons (CC BY-SA-3.0)

The [Avenue of the
Baobabs](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Avenue_of_the_Baobabs) is located
between Morondava and Belon'i Tsiribihina in the Menabe region in western
Madagascar. Baobab trees, up to 800 years old, stand about 30 meters in height
and this particular species is endemic to Madagascar. The site was present in
the news recently because it was victim of a [wild fire that burnt down newly
planted trees](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2012/11/27/99-trees-from-famed-
avenue-of-the-baobabs-in-madagascar-burnt-down/) around the giant trees.

**The Stone Forest of Bamaraha,** **Madagascar**

[![Tsingy de Bemaraha Strict Nature Reserve in Madagascar. Image on Wikipedia
\(CC BY-3.0\).](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2012/11/439px-
Tsingy_de_Bemaraha-219x300.jpg)](http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Tsingy_de_Bemaraha.jpg)

Tsingy de Bemaraha Strict Nature Reserve in Madagascar. Image on Wikipedia (CC
BY-3.0).

[Tsingy de
Bemaraha](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tsingy_de_Bemaraha_Strict_Nature_Reserve)
is a nature reserve located near the western coast of Madagascar in the Melaky
Region. This National Park is a UNESCO World Heritage Site, and the main
attraction is the stone forest that is composed of limestone needles
originating from erosion patterns from groundwater and winds.

**Zuma Rock,** **Nigeria**

[![Zuma Rock near Abuja by Jeff Attaway on Flickr \(CC-
BY-2.0\).](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-content/uploads/2012/12/zuma-
rock-375x281.jpg)](http://www.flickr.com/photos/attawayjl/3329172966/)

Zuma Rock near Abuja by Jeff Attaway on Flickr (CC-BY-2.0).

[Zuma Rock](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Zuma_Rock) is a 725 meter high
monolith found in Nigeria on the road out of Abuja. Its nickname ‘Gateway to
Abuja’ is derived from this road.

**The Peak of Furnace,** **Réunion Island**

[![Eruption at the Peak, April 2007 on FlickR by zatiqs \(CC license-BY-NC-
SA\).](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-content/uploads/2012/12/piton-de-la-
fournaise-375x250.jpg)](http://www.flickr.com/photos/zatiqs/2209046189/in/set-72157600309526894/)

Eruption at the Peak, April 2007 on FlickR by zatiqs (CC BY-NC-SA).

Le Piton de la Fournaise (The Peak of Furnace) is a shield volcano on the
eastern side of Réunion island in the Indian Ocean. It is one of the most
active volcanoes in the world.

**The Aldabra Atoll,** **Seychelles**

![Aldabra Island, Seychelles on FlickR by Johny Shaw \(CC-
BY-2.0\).](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2012/11/aldabra-375x249.jpg)

Aldabra Island, Seychelles on FlickR by Johny Shaw (CC-BY-2.0).

[**Aldabra**](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Aldabra) is **** the world's second
largest coral atoll and forms part of the Seychelles. Aldabra is almost
entirely free of human interference and is home to the world's largest
population of [giant tortoises](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Giant_tortoise
"Giant tortoise").

******Mount Kilimanjaro,** **Tanzania**

[![Kibo on Mt Kilimanjaro by Chris 73 \(CC-NC-
BY\).](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-content/uploads/2012/12/800px-
Kibo_Mt._Kilimanjaro_3-375x281.jpg)](http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Kibo_Mt._Kilimanjaro_3.JPG)

Kibo on Mt Kilimanjaro by Chris 73 (CC-NC-BY).

Kilimanjaro is the [highest
mountain](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Extremes_of_Altitude "Extremes of
Altitude") in [Africa](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Africa "Africa") and the
highest freestanding mountain in the
[world](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/World "World") at 5,895 meters. The
current shrinking and thinning of Kilimanjaro's ice field is similar to other
[glacier retreat](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Retreat_of_glaciers_since_1850
"Retreat of glaciers since 1850") in mid-to-low latitudes across the globe. At
the current rate, Kilimanjaro is expected to become ice-free some time between
2022 and 2033.  
****

**Ngorongoro Crater, Tanzania**

[![A young male lion at the hunt in Ngorongoro Crater by Brocken Inaglory on
Wikimedia \(CC-BY-3.0\).](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2012/12/A_male_Lion_Zebras_and_Wildebeest_in_Ngorongoro_Crater-375x249.jpeg)](http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:A_male_Lion,_Zebras_and_Wildebeest_in_Ngorongoro_Crater.jpeg)

A young male lion at the hunt in Ngorongoro Crater by Brocken Inaglory on
Wikimedia (CC-BY-3.0).

The [Ngorongoro
Crater](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ngorongoro_Crater#Ngorongoro_Crater) is a
large, unbroken, unflooded volcanic caldera located in the west of Arusha in
the Crater Highlands area of Tanzania. The crater plays host to almost every
individual species of wildlife in East Africa, with an estimated 25,000
animals within the crater.

**The Serengeti Migration, Tanzania**

[![Wildebeest crossing the river by Stefan Swanepoel in Wikipedia \(CC-
BY-3.0\).](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2012/12/Wildebeest_crossing_river_-
_Stefan_Swanepoel_-375x250.jpg)](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Wildebeest_crossing_river_-
_Stefan_Swanepoel_.jpg)

Wildebeest crossing the river by Stefan Swanepoel in Wikipedia (CC-BY-3.0).

The Serengeti migration is the longest and largest overland migration in the
world. Each year, the great wildebeest migration begins in the
[Ngorongoro](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ngorongoro "Ngorongoro") area of the
southern Serengeti of Tanzania in January to March, when the calving season
begins; some 750,000 zebra precede the migration of 1.2 million wildebeest.

**The Sahara Desert**

[![Camels in Guelta d'Archei, Ennedi, north-east Chad. Image on Wikipedia
\(CC-BY-2.0\).](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2012/11/GueltaCamels.jpg)](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/File:GueltaCamels.jpg)

Camels in Guelta d'Archei, Ennedi, north-east Chad. Image on Wikipedia (CC-
BY-2.0).

The Sahara Desert is the largest hot desert in the world. The desert
encompasses, at least in part, the countries of Algeria, Chad, Egypt, Libya,
Mali, Mauritania, Morocco, Niger, Western Sahara, Sudan, and Tunisia. The
southern border of the Sahara is marked by a band of semi-arid savanna called
the Sahel.

**Bloggers’ suggestions**

A number of natural wonders were omitted from the shortlist, so a few bloggers
have added their own suggestions via their blogs. A slight controversy was the
fact that a few countries were featured several times while others were not
mentioned at all, despite having worthy candidates.

******The Victoria Falls, Zambia and Zimbabwe**

The [Victoria Falls](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Victoria_Falls) at the
border of Zambia and Zimbabwe is already selected as one of the seven natural
wonders of the world.

[![Swimming at the edge of Victoria Falls in a naturally formed safe pool,
accessed via Livingstone Island. Image on Wikimedia Commons, released into
public domain by Ian Restall.](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2012/12/800px-
Tourists_swimming_at_Victoria_Falls-375x249.jpg)](http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Tourists_swimming_at_Victoria_Falls.jpg)

Swimming at the edge of Victoria Falls in a naturally formed safe pool,
accessed via Livingstone Island. Image on Wikimedia Commons, released into
public domain by Ian Restall.

******Blyde River Canyon,** **South Africa** ****

The Blyde River Canyon is located in
[Mpumalanga](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mpumalanga "Mpumalanga") and forms
the northern part of the
[Drakensberg](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Drakensberg "Drakensberg")
[escarpment](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Escarpment "Escarpment"). It is 16
miles (26 kilometers) in length and is on average around 2,500 feet (762
meters) deep. The Canyon consists mostly of red
[sandstone](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sandstone "Sandstone").

[![The Weeping Face of Nature located in Blyde River Canyon. Image by Ptosio
on Wikipedia \(CC-BY-3.0\).](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2012/12/800px-
WeepingFaceofNatureInBlydeRiverCanyon-375x251.jpg)](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/File:WeepingFaceofNatureInBlydeRiverCanyon.JPG)

The Weeping Face of Nature located in Blyde River Canyon. Image by Ptosio on
Wikipedia (CC-BY-3.0).

Feel free to add any sites that you feel were omitted in the selection process
in the comments section below.

