Global Warming is something thats affecting us all. But even in this regard
there are different camps. Some believe that its a very important concern and
something should be done about it while some believe that its not as big or
critical concern as is made out of it and there are also some who don't
believe at all that this is a critical concern! [Dr.Mandhata Singh
reports](http://apnamat.blogspot.com/2008/02/blog-post.html) that
[Kolkata](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Kolkata)(erstwhile Calcutta), an
eastern port city of India and erstwhile capital of British India, will
submerge into [Bay of Bengal](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bay_of_Bengal) in
next 30-100 years if global warming and melting of Himalayan icecaps continues
at the current rate. He says that a similar fate is likely for the
[Sundarbans](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sundarbans) according to a social
organisation NEWS (which is working for the welfare of the Sundarbans) and
Marine Science department of University of Calcutta.

[Gyandutt Pandey narrates an evening's
incident](http://hgdp.blogspot.com/2008/02/blog-post_12.html) as he returns
from his office and his chauffeur tunes into a phone-in film music show on
radio and on that evening a girl phoned in and is over the moon having had her
call connected to the show. The hostess of the show asks about her studies and
plans for the future but in her high the girl blurts that she's worried about
her marriage! The hostess gets a bit uncomfortable unsure how to handle this
and she gives an idealistic advice that the girl should focus on her studies
and then her career and she'll get married when the time comes. Now the girl
realized that by speaking her mind truthfully she'd unknowingly dissolved some
tension in a film music programme. The chauffeur also feels a bit
uncomfortable at this and turns off the radio while Gyandutt gets thinking
that dowry issues are still very much present in the society, newly wed women
are still being murdered by being burned alive just because their parents
failed to give the demanded dowry. But when asked people say that they want a
good daughter-in-law and not dowry. And he wonders then why the girl concerned
was about her marriage??!!

[Ravi Ratlami](http://raviratlami.blogspot.com/2008/02/blog-post_12.html) is
telling everyone how commands in Hindi can also be given now to the computer.
He says that till now this feature was available only in Unix and Linux but
now its also available in Microsoft Windows using a tool called
[PowerShell](http://download.microsoft.com/download/0/c/c/0ccf1523-8d1a-48b8-ae08-b696522e909c/PowerShell_Setup_x86.msi)
from Microsoft. He says that commands are still in English and if one wants to
use the Hindi commands then aliases will have to be created for the
corresponding English commands and he illustrates this with an example of how
to create an alias for opening Notepad and then opening it by issuing the
Hindi command. Similarly other unicode languages can be used with PowerShell.

And as it seems, things are not going well in Stock Markets around the world
and same is the case with the two major Indian stock exchanges; BSE(Bombay
Stock Exchange) and NSE(National Stock Exchange). As [Sauda
Bazaar](http://saudabazaar.blogspot.com/2008/02/blog-post_12.html) reports,
[Anil Ambani](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Anil_Ambani) headed [Reliance
Power](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Reliance_Power)â€˜s share was listed on
Monday but it sent shockwaves through the market as BSE's main index recorded
its 3rd biggest and NSE's major index recorded its 4th biggest loss. Buyers,
both who were left out in the IPO and those who wanted to buy more, were
disappointed as Reliance Power's share opened at Rs.530 (it went for Rs.450 in
IPO) and then came down after that throughout the day. Its sister company
Reliance Energy also fell big as its share began the day on Rs.1965 and after
going Rs.20 up it continued its downfall and at the end of the day it closed
at Rs.1582.30. Overall except IT companies everyone saw a further drop in
their stock's value and its expected that this slide in the market will
continue this week.

Links courtesy: [_Narad_](http://narad.akshargram.com/)

