[![transgender bath beppu japan](https://globalvoices.org/wp-
content/uploads/2018/05/transgender-bath-beppu-
japan-800x450.png)](https://youtu.be/fd_stP-4o8c)

People who identify as male enjoy a transgender-friendly bath in Beppu, Japan.
[Screencap from NHK / YouTube](https://youtu.be/fd_stP-4o8c).

Japan's “hot spring capital” is trying to find ways to make one of the
country's most popular pastimes more inclusive for people who identify as
LGBT, when most public baths are segregated according to a binary of either
“male” or “female”.

The [Rainbow Furoject](https://www.nhk.or.jp/ten5/ten5chan/lgbt/rainbow/)
(‘furoject’ is a portmanteau of the Japanese word for ‘bath’, _ofuro_ , お風呂,
and project’) is an initiative of the city of [Beppu](http://en.visit-
oita.jp/oita/onsen), located in Oita Prefecture on the southwestern Japanese
island of Kyushu.

On May 1, 2018, forty people, including members of the LGBT community as well
as Beppu residents came together at a hot spring resort operated by the
municipality to bathe together and brainstorm ideas to make it easier for
people who identify as LGBT to enjoy bathing in hot springs in Japan.

>
> 昨日深夜の『[#テンゴちゃん](https://twitter.com/hashtag/%E3%83%86%E3%83%B3%E3%82%B4%E3%81%A1%E3%82%83%E3%82%93?src=hash&ref_src=twsrc%5Etfw)』で放送していた「[#レインボー風呂ジェクト](https://twitter.com/hashtag/%E3%83%AC%E3%82%A4%E3%83%B3%E3%83%9C%E3%83%BC%E9%A2%A8%E5%91%82%E3%82%B8%E3%82%A7%E3%82%AF%E3%83%88?src=hash&ref_src=twsrc%5Etfw)」が良かった。「どうしたら誰もが温泉を楽しめるのか」を考えるため、男女二択だけではない、あらゆる性の人たちが「見た目の湯」「戸籍の湯」「自己申告の湯」という三通りの入浴方法を試すという企画。<https://t.co/ju8RKQBIEY>
> [pic.twitter.com/m6zogL8aYs](https://t.co/m6zogL8aYs)
>
> — おなか (@HNamachiri) [May 13,
> 2018](https://twitter.com/HNamachiri/status/995494477132283904?ref_src=twsrc%5Etfw)

> The
> [#RainbowFuroject](https://twitter.com/hashtag/%E3%83%AC%E3%82%A4%E3%83%B3%E3%83%9C%E3%83%BC%E9%A2%A8%E5%91%82%E3%82%B8%E3%82%A7%E3%82%AF%E3%83%88?src=hash&ref_src=twsrc%5Etfw)
> broadcast late last night on
> [#TenGoChan](https://twitter.com/hashtag/%E3%83%86%E3%83%B3%E3%82%B4%E3%81%A1%E3%82%83%E3%82%93?src=hash&ref_src=twsrc%5Etfw)
> (NHK Ten5 or Channel 1.5) was great.
>
> To help answer the question “what can we do to make sure anyone can enjoy a
> dip in a hot spring?”, rather than dividing bathers (by binary gender),
> instead participants came up with three ways of organizing bathers in order
> to accommodate every gender: how one looks “on the outside”, how one's sex
> is recognized in official documents, and by which sexuality one identifies
> with oneself.

According to organizers of the event, it's difficult for many members of the
LGBT community, especially those who identify as transgender, and not always
according to the gender binary of male/female, to easily enjoy communal
bathing. Hot springs and public baths in Japan are almost always segregated
into “male” baths and “female” baths, with no recognition of gender fluidity.

Bathing in hot springs or public baths is a big part of Japanese culture. It's
estimated there are at least
[27,000](https://www.onsen-r.co.jp/data/sengen.html) hot springs in use in
Japan, and 3,500 of them are in Oita Prefecture, the most of any prefecture.
Hot spring towns like Beppu, home to clusters of hotels to suit every taste
and every budget, have been popular vacation destinations in Japan for at
least a thousand years.

As well, most municipalities will also operate subsidized public hot spring
baths for locals to relax and take a dip, typically with family, friends or
coworkers.

[![Beppu-shi - 別府市](https://globalvoices.org/wp-
content/uploads/2018/05/14263395831_b97bea6830_b-800x398.jpg)](https://www.flickr.com/photos/pouchin/14263395831/in/photolist-
nJpCDM-k12jty-s4pvFt-GZMqn-qYqypp-jZxsnz-k12PYq-q2MGvK-hk1aDc-
snJFx4-5ZN62P-6paitD-s4puUD-s6arns-jZzroN-GZQX7-s4pwik-hk1DdS-k11CPd-jZYZiH-
rqJpyu-25mgJSE-d4S1eG-jZzwXd-5ZSb6N-e6sQvV-jZzv2j-k12MJ5-d4b52u-8L42bN-skrFCG-
rqJrtb-jZYybk-jZYdKX-qrsHP5-9FfZux-jZZERv-62mU7D-jZxyMD-rqVH5i-snJHUZ-
jZZj4a-jZZbLz-GZQ7n-mFSTmN-jZwEhF-EmoBrB-mRPQng-rqVHQ6-jZxKqT)

“[Beppu-shi –
別府市](https://www.flickr.com/photos/pouchin/14263395831/in/photolist-
nJpCDM-k12jty-s4pvFt-GZMqn-qYqypp-jZxsnz-k12PYq-q2MGvK-hk1aDc-
snJFx4-5ZN62P-6paitD-s4puUD-s6arns-jZzroN-GZQX7-s4pwik-hk1DdS-k11CPd-jZYZiH-
rqJpyu-25mgJSE-d4S1eG-jZzwXd-5ZSb6N-e6sQvV-jZzv2j-k12MJ5-d4b52u-8L42bN-skrFCG-
rqJrtb-jZYybk-jZYdKX-qrsHP5-9FfZux-jZZERv-62mU7D-jZxyMD-rqVH5i-snJHUZ-
jZZj4a-jZZbLz-GZQ7n-mFSTmN-jZwEhF-EmoBrB-mRPQng-rqVHQ6-jZxKqT)” by Flickr user
[Thomas](https://www.flickr.com/photos/pouchin/). Plumes of steam come from
various hot spring resort hotels in the town. Image license: CC BY-NC 2.0.

Oita's Beppu, [one of the most famous hot spring towns in
Japan](https://www.japan-guide.com/e/e4702.html), has regularly tried out
different strategies for appealing to visitors, including creating a [bathtub
theme park](https://www.japantimes.co.jp/news/2017/07/29/national/beppu-makes-
splash-bathtub-theme-park/) and launching a PR campaign for the resort that
featured [Olympic synchronized swimmers taking over a hot spring
bath](https://www.japantimes.co.jp/news/2017/07/04/national/oita-aims-heat-
things-olympic-onsen-video/#.WwG6vkgvxhE).

The May 1 _LGBT Furoject_ was hosted by [Kitahama Onsen
Termas](https://www.nhk.or.jp/ten5/ten5chan/lgbt/), a day-use hot spring
operated by the city. The event was covered by specialty channel
[TenGo](http://www6.nhk.or.jp/nhkpr/post/original.html?i=14405), which is part
of NHK, Japan's national broadcaster; and Oguni Shiro, an NHK producer and
columnist who attended and reported the event for [Forbes
Japan](https://forbesjapan.com/articles/detail/21028).

During the day, bathing sessions were organized by three themes: how bathers
outwardly present, regardless of their gender assigned at birth; according to
the sex designated in their official government identification; and according
to which sexuality they identify with.

The result was that participants were given the chance to explore and
understand how transgender and [non-
binary](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Transgender) people experience hot
spring baths in Japan, where bathers must typically choose to bathe on either
the “male” or “female” side of the bath. Throughout the day, Beppu locals got
a chance to share the bath and develop relationships with members of the LGBT
community invited to attend the event.

The goal of the day was for the group to come up with some ways to make group
bathing in Japan more inclusive of people of all genders. According to Oguni
Shiro, [writing in
Forbes](https://forbesjapan.com/articles/detail/21028/3/1/1), some ideas for
making baths more LGBT-friendly included, rather than segregating the baths
according to the binary “male” versus “female”, dividing bathers according to
blood type ([an important concept in
Japan](https://www.tofugu.com/japan/japanese-blood-type/)).

Other ideas included signage indicating a bathing facility as “LGBT friendly”,
such as certain establishments in Japan are identified as “pet-friendly” or
“tattoo friendly” ([people with tattoos are generally barred from public baths
in Japan](https://kotaku.com/japans-problem-with-tattoos-1767685623)). Another
idea is that hot spring resorts should be proactively hiring members of the
LGBT community to help to make bathing more inclusive.

Besides providing the opportunity for brainstorming ideas, the _Furoject_ on
May 1 also allowed some participants to partake in a quintessential Japanese
pastime: taking a bath in public.

Interviewed by NHK, one participant and bather, a man who had undergone gender
reassignment surgery, said that he generally could only go for a bath either
very early in the morning or late in the evening, when there were fewer people
in the bath who could observe him.

Another participant
[said](https://forbesjapan.com/articles/detail/21028/3/1/1):

> 「（体女性、心男性の）トランスジェンダーの自分が男湯にはいっても『違和感ないよ』って言ってくれた。広いお風呂に入ったのは13年ぶり。すごく嬉しかった！」

> “(As a man who was assigned female gender at birth), when I had a bath on
> the men's side (at _Furoject_ in Beppu on May 1), no one felt uncomfortable
> at all. This is the first time I've entered a communal bath in 13 years. It
> made me so happy!”

The entire NHK TenGo program about the event can be viewed [on YouTube at this
link (Japanese-only)](https://youtu.be/fd_stP-4o8c), while YouTube vlogger
[Kazue-chan](https://twitter.com/kazuchan1982) also attended the event and
made a [video blog](https://youtu.be/3odADXsgF4g) (also Japanese-only).

