[![Analyzing 25,000 individual observations, wildlife managers in India find
clues to help stop tiger poachers in their tracks. Photo by The Belurs
\(Flickr | Creative Commons\)](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2015/01/ensia_tiger.jpg)](https://www.flickr.com/photos/the-
belurs/8512622292/)

Analyzing 25,000 individual observations, wildlife managers in India find
clues to help stop tiger poachers in their tracks. Photo by Flickr user The
Belurs CC-BY-NC-SA 2.0

_**This post by[Roger Drouin](http://ensia.com/about/people/rogerdrouin/) was[
originally published](http://ensia.com/features/can-big-data-save-the-last-of-
indias-wild-tigers/) on Ensia.com, a magazine that highlights international
environmental solutions in action, and is republished here according to a
content-sharing agreement. **_

Traveling in small, nomadic groups, carrying knives, axes and steel traps,
tiger poachers in India have long held advantages over those trying to protect
the big cats. The poachers, motivated mainly by demand for tiger bones used in
traditional medicine in China, return every two to three years to places where
they know “every stream and rocky outcrop” and set traps along tigers’
pathways or near watering holes, says Belinda Wright, executive director of
the [Wildlife Protection Society of India](http://www.wpsi-
india.org/wpsi/index.php). They are seldom caught.

“They have unbelievable knowledge and jungle craft,” Wright says. “They will
use every trick in the book.”

But a study published last August by Wright, ecologist Koustubh Sharma and
colleagues could help turn the tide against tiger poaching in India, home to
more than half of the tiger’s global wild population.

The study, [published in the journal Biological
Conservation](http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0006320714003048),
applied a new method to estimate the probability of occurrence and detection
of tiger crime in various areas of India, then used it to identify 73 key “hot
spots” with high likelihood of tiger poaching and trafficking in tiger parts.
According to the authors, it could lead to more efficient anti-poaching
efforts by giving conservationists, enforcement officials and forest rangers
working to save the tigers the ability to home in on where enforcement is
needed most and thus improve the odds of saving India’s imperiled national
animal.

Over the past few years, Sharma, a senior regional ecologist with [Snow
Leopard Trust](http://www.snowleopard.org) and scientist with [Nature
Conservation Foundation](http://ncf-india.org), and his team wrote computer
code and analyzed 25,000 data points — collected since 1972 across 605
districts — on wildlife poaching crimes, including locations of confirmed
tiger poaching instances and sites where tiger parts had been seized. “It’s
such a huge dataset that whenever I would run the analysis cycle, it would
take 20 to 25 minutes for each model,” Sharma says.

“An intelligence network is the most crucial step in curbing tiger and
wildlife crime,” says Wright. More intelligence means being able to better
place informers on the ground and use cell phone interceptions. It also means
knowing where to target field patrols and forest ranger activities. Of utmost
importance, Sharma says, is knowing where crime patterns have changed as
poachers’ tactics change. That’s why researchers worked to formulate modeling
that could be updated regularly.

“At the end of the day we have to try to be a step ahead of the criminals,”
says Sharma. “That’s what insurance companies and banks do. They do models and
create projections, and invest. We have something similar. We have these
models and projections, and we have to invest accordingly.”

Current hot spots for tiger crime identified by the study include some regions
that surprised researchers and could likely benefit from increased
enforcement. The Nepal-India border region, for instance, has had less
enforcement in the past than other areas, Sharma says. The study found that
the region has been under growing poaching pressure, likely due to an increase
in the local tiger population and its role as a hub for trafficking tiger
bones into China, Sharma says. “That is an area we are highlighting as a hot
spot where policy makers should take action,” Sharma says.

The formulas used to calculate current and changing hot spots is already
getting the attention of those charged with preventing illegal poaching across
India.The study also found evidence that poachers prefer to use rail routes,
where they can more easily blend in with millions of passengers daily. At
least 17 districts far from tiger forests, including Delhi and Indore, scored
high on tiger crime because they are trade hubs.

The formulas used to calculate current and changing hot spots is already
getting the attention of those charged with preventing illegal poaching across
India. In September, Sharma called the paper to the attention of Rajesh Gopal,
member secretary of the [National Tiger Conservation Authority of
India](http://projecttiger.nic.in), who forwarded the findings to field
managers in charge of monitoring wild tigers and fighting poachers in tiger
reserves and buffer areas. Sharma notes the methodology, combined with on-the-
ground enforcement, can also be used to curb illegal poaching of other
species, from leopards to pangolins.

“What we need is good technology and good enforcement on the ground,” Wright
says. “Nothing can replace a human with two legs, two hands and a brain.”

_**Robert Drouin is a freelance environmental journalist and author. He covers
species conservation, from bats to snow leopards, and energy issues. His work
appears in Scientific American, Yale Environment 360, Mother Jones and
Grist.org. He blogs[here](www.rogersoutdoorblog.com ) and tweets from
[@rogerreal](twitter.com/rogerreal).**_

