[![Rafael Correa at a 2013 parade in Guayaquil, Ecuador. Photo by Cancilleria
Ecuador via Flickr \(CC BY-SA
2.0\)](https://advocacy.globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2014/10/Ecuador-Rafael-Correa-Cancilleria-Ecuador-BY-
SA.jpg)](https://www.flickr.com/photos/dgcomsoc/10174331283/sizes/c/)

Rafael Correa at a 2013 parade in Guayaquil, Ecuador. Photo by Cancilleria
Ecuador via Flickr (CC BY-SA 2.0)

[_Mahsa Alimardani_](https://advocacy.globalvoicesonline.org/author/mahsa-
alimardani/) _,_[ _Juan Arellano_](https://globalvoicesonline.org/author/juan-
arellano/) _,_[ _Ellery Roberts
Biddle_](https://advocacy.globalvoicesonline.org/author/ellery-roberts-
biddle/) _,_[ _Lisa
Ferguson_](https://advocacy.globalvoicesonline.org/author/lisa-ferguson/) _,
Bojan Perkov, Sonia Roubini and_[ _Sarah Myers
West_](https://advocacy.globalvoicesonline.org/author/sarahbmyers/)
_contributed to this report._

Global Voices Advocacy's Netizen Report offers an international snapshot of
challenges, victories, and emerging trends in Internet rights around the
world. This week's report begins in Ecuador, where an online video titled
“[What Correa Doesn’t Want You to
See](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=N6h88WT6n7Q)” (referring to President
Rafael Correa) was [removed from YouTube](http://fundamedios.org.ec/monitoreo-
de-libertades/alertas/youtube-retira-video-anteriormente-censurado-por-
facebook) on Sept. 29. The video intersperses excerpts from a public speech in
which Correa spoke about law enforcement with footage of police abuses of
demonstrators at a [Sept. 18
protest](http://www.elcomercio.com/actualidad/protesta-quito-deja-policias-
heridos.html) in the capital city of Quito. The company removed the video in
response to a request from the office of Ecuador’s secretary of communication,
which claimed the video violated copyright. The video, which was also removed
from Facebook, was reinstated on YouTube on Oct. 2.

The incident highlights yet another facet of the Ecuadorian government’s
increasingly restrictive policies and practices toward media of all kinds.
Correa, who the Committee to Protect Journalists recently described as the
country’s “[media-critic-in-chief](https://cpj.org/blog/2014/07/pressured-by-
government-ecuadoran-cartoonist-is-fo.php),” promulgated a far-reaching
[Communications
Law](https://advocacy.globalvoicesonline.org/2013/07/22/mechanisms-of-
censorship-in-ecuadors-communications-law/) that has had devastating
consequences for media outlets and workers at every level. Since its passage
in 2013, multiple print and online news sources have closed their doors,
alongside many online outlets. In a high-profile case, [cartoonist Xavier
Bonilla](https://cpj.org/blog/2014/07/pressured-by-government-ecuadoran-
cartoonist-is-fo.php) was ordered to erase a cartoon depicting government
officials and redraw them in a more flattering light.

U.N. Special Rapporteur on Freedom of Expression Frank La Rue [characterized
the law as
being](https://advocacy.globalvoicesonline.org/2013/07/22/mechanisms-of-
censorship-in-ecuadors-communications-law/) “clearly directed at limiting the
liberty of reporters to report on current events, public policies, and
government officials.”

**Pro-Beijing Hackers Obliterate Independent Media Sites En Masse**  
Independent Hong Kong media and citizen-organizing sites including Passion
Times, Post852, HKDash, and inmediahk.net have undergone [massive
cyberattacks](https://advocacy.globalvoicesonline.org/2014/10/06/the-
invisible-violence-of-cyber-war-in-hong-kongs-umbrella-revolution/) that have
taken them offline for varying periods over the past 10 days. Fears about a
[full network blackout](v) persist, though these appear to be just rumors for
the moment.

In response to the [media frenzy](http://www.vice.com/read/firechat-hong-kong-
protest-app-284) surrounding FireChat, a Bluetooth-enabled app that allows
users to communicate in public chatrooms, Global Voices worked with experts
from inmediahk.net, Citizen Lab, and the Tibet Action Institute to highlight
security flaws in the app and [prepared a list
](https://advocacy.globalvoicesonline.org/2014/10/02/the-adoption-of-firechat-
and-threats-to-hong-kong-protesters/)of tips for users to better secure their
communications during a protest.

[Smartphone spyware](http://blogs.wsj.com/digits/2014/10/03/smartphone-
spyware-targets-hong-kong-protesters/) purporting to be “for the coordination
of Occupy Central” is circulating among Hong Kong protesters who are using the
WhatsApp messaging app. When a link included in a WhatsApp message is
activated, the app reveals the user’s geolocation, SMS, address book, and
emails, among other data.

**Bahrain arrests yet another human rights leader**  
Leading Bahraini human rights defender Nabeel Rajab was [arrested on
charges](https://advocacy.globalvoicesonline.org/2014/10/02/bahrains-
prominent-human-rights-activist-arrested-for-criticizing-police-defectors-who-
joined-isis/) of “insulting a public institution” after sending a tweet
insinuating that Bahrain’s security apparatus serves as an “incubator” for
ISIS fighters. The tweet read:

> many [#Bahrain](https://twitter.com/hashtag/Bahrain?src=hash) men who joined
> [#terrorism](https://twitter.com/hashtag/terrorism?src=hash) &
> [#ISIS](https://twitter.com/hashtag/ISIS?src=hash) came from security
> institutions and those institutions were the first ideological incubator
>
> — Nabeel Rajab (@NABEELRAJAB) [September 28,
> 2014](https://twitter.com/NABEELRAJAB/status/516179409720852480)

Rajab was released from prison in May 2014 after serving two years for taking
part in protests against a brutal crackdown in Bahrain. He remained in police
custody as of this report’s publication. On Tuesday, Oct. 7, supporters ran a
tweet storm calling for his release, under the hashtag #FreeNabeel.

**The increasingly watchful eyes of Egypt’s government**  
The Egyptian government is [attempting to
develop](http://www.madamasr.com/content/you-are-being-watched-egypts-mass-
internet-surveillance) a mass surveillance system that would monitor the
digital activity of all Internet users in the country. Egypt’s Ministry of
Interior has called for a [limited
tender](http://www.elwatannews.com/news/details/495659) to provide and operate
software that monitors Internet activities, including private conversations
and messages sent through mobile applications like Viber and WhatsApp.

**Who will want to visit Colombia’s one-stop shop for citizen data?**  
Colombian ICT Minister Diego Molano is pushing a [policy
initiative](http://www.semana.com/tecnologia/articulo/cada-colombiano-tendra-
un-email-oficial/402110-3) under which the government will bestow upon each
citizen a “digital portfolio,” where all of one’s personal data held by the
state, ranging from state identification and passport numbers to tax
information and health data, would be stored together and come with a unique
government-issued email address.

Although conceived as a pathway to greater efficiency in communication between
government agencies and reduction of paper use, the policy has raised concern
that it may leave citizens vulnerable to greater government surveillance or to
malicious hacking.

**Netizen Activism: #FreeSaeed campaign for jailed Iranian open source
developer**  
Convicted of threatening the nation’s Islamic ideals and national security,
Iranian Web and circumvention tool developer [Saeed
Malekpour](https://advocacy.globalvoicesonline.org/2014/10/06/freesaeed-an-
iranian-web-developers-sixth-year-in-prison/) has spent six years in prison
for creating an [open-source software
program](https://github.com/saeedmalekpour) that others used to upload
pornographic images to the Internet. On the anniversary of his arrest,
activists and bloggers ran a tweet storm to support his release under the
hashtag #freeSaeed.

**New tool makes it easy for U.S. parents to spy on their children**  
U.S. police have been [distributing
spyware](http://www.wired.com/2014/10/cops-giving-parents-spyware/) to parents
seeking to monitor their children’s activity online. Researchers at the
Electronic Frontier Foundation [found that the
software](https://www.eff.org/deeplinks/2014/09/computercop-dangerous-
internet-safety-software-hundreds-police-agencies), known as ComputerCOP,
includes a keystroke logger and the ability to search the computer for files
and videos. They also found that the program sends some of this data to a
server belonging to the company making the software, over an unencrypted
connection.

Ironically, earlier this week federal authorities [issued an
indictment](http://www.wired.com/2014/10/stealthgenie-indictment/) on
wiretapping charges against the creator of a similar spyware program marketed
to people seeking to track their spouses.

**EU Commission set to investigate U.K. government spying**  
The European Union’s ombudsman, Emily O’Reilly, called on the European
Commission to [release a set of
documents](http://www.pcworld.com/article/2692132/european-commission-told-to-
publish-uk-mass-internet-surveillance-docs.html) related to mass Internet
surveillance conducted by the U.K. intelligence agency GCHQ, arguing EU
citizens have the [right to be informed
](http://www.ombudsman.europa.eu/cases/draftrecommendation.faces/en/57367/html.bookmark)about
such discussions. The Commission denied a German journalist access to the
documents, which include letters between the U.K. government and the
Commission as well as correspondence from citizens asking the commission to
investigate.

**New Research**

  * [Russia, Ukraine and the West: Social Media Sentiment in the Euromaidan Protests](http://cyber.law.harvard.edu/node/9383) – Berkman Center for Internet & Society
  * [Asia Chats: LINE keyword filtering upgraded to include regular expressions](https://citizenlab.org/2014/10/asia-chats-line-keyword-filtering-upgraded-include-regular-expressions/) – Citizen Lab

  * [Censors at Work: How States Shaped Literature](http://books.wwnorton.com/books/Censors-at-Work/) – Robert Darnton

