![The dangerous game of RuNet porn. Edited by Kevin
Rothrock.](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2014/10/porntorrent.jpg)

The dangerous game of RuNet porn. Edited by Kevin Rothrock.

A court in Russia has [convicted](http://www.kemprok.ru/8949.htm) a 23-year-
old woman of illegally disseminating pornography on the Internet, handing down
a two-year [suspended
sentence](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Suspended_sentence).

The woman, whose name has not been released to the public, lives in
[Kemerovo](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Kemerovo), more than 2,000 miles east
of Moscow, not far from Novosibirsk. A judge ruled that she violated [Article
242](http://www.hsph.harvard.edu/population/trafficking/russianfed.traf.03.htm)
of Russia’s criminal code, which bans “illegal distribution of pornographic
materials” over the Internet, when she downloaded and shared [three
pornographic films](http://therunet.com/news/3717-devushku-prigovorili-k-dvum-
godam-uslovno-za-skachivanie-treh-pornofilmov) in November 2012, using the
popular peer-to-peer [BitTorrent
protocol](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/BitTorrent). The conviction does not
involve copyright issues.

In court, the accused denied that she knew she was also sharing pornographic
content while she downloaded the films, but Kemerovo prosecutors say she
admitted this knowledge when they initially seized her computer during their
investigation.

A cursory search of “porno torrent” activity on the Russian Internet shows
that tens of thousands of RuNet users regularly download and share
pornographic films using peer-to-peer technology. Russian websites like “porn-
uptracker” and “toptracker,” for example, document that over 100,000 users
have viewed the most popular “torrent trackers” for pornographic movies.

