[!["God is with us. Are you filtering him too?" Photo by Cyrus Farivar via
Flickr \(CC BY-ND-SA 2.0\)](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2014/09/3702700886_665834494f_o.jpg)](https://www.flickr.com/photos/cfarivar/3702700886/in/photolist-6K7jMB-64yNV1-6DciYs-9ziAN4-7QFA84)

“God is with us. Will you filter him too?” Photo by Cyrus Farivar via Flickr
(CC BY-ND-SA 2.0)

In a
[report](http://isna.ir/fa/news/93061710204/%D9%86%D8%AA%D8%A7%DB%8C%D8%AC-%D8%AC%D8%AF%DB%8C%D8%AF%D8%AA%D8%B1%DB%8C%D9%86-%D9%86%D8%B8%D8%B1%D8%B3%D9%86%D8%AC%DB%8C-%D8%A7%D8%B2-%D8%AC%D9%88%D8%A7%D9%86%D8%A7%D9%86-%D8%A7%D8%B9%D9%84%D8%A7%D9%85-%D8%B4%D8%AF)
conducted by Iran's Ministry of Youth and Sports, the Iranian government
announced that of 23.5 million youth using the Internet, 69.3 percent of them
are using circumvention technology such as proxies and VPNs — virtual private
networks that provide access to the “global Internet”.

At the moment, Iranians often encounter a firewall when trying to access
websites that appear antagonistic towards the government or the nation’s
Islamic ideals. The report did not make mention of the legality of
circumvention tools. But according to Iran’s list of [Computer
Crimes](http://www.cyberpolice.ir/page/2551), the distribution of both
circumvention technology and instructions to use such tools are both illegal.
Violating these laws can result in severe punishment.

Iran's Internet policy remains an often incoherent and fractious issue. Last
week President Hassan Rouhani stated that filters could never be effective in
a nation like Iran; however a few days later the Ministry of Culture and
Islamic Guidance started [blocking news
websites](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2014/09/09/the-iranian-government-is-
blocking-unregistered-news-sites/) without proper press licensing. Similarly,
while Rouhani and key members of his cabinet are some of the most recognized
Twitter and Facebook users in the country, both social networks [remain
blocked](https://advocacy.globalvoicesonline.org/2013/10/22/rouhanis-tweets-
leave-users-wondering-does-real-change-lie-ahead/) for regular Iranian
Internet users.

While some have argued that Rouhani’s Internet policy is one of the rare areas
where rhetoric and action coincide, pointing to recent [improvements in mobile
and fixed line Internet
infrastructure](http://www.indexoncensorship.org/2014/09/iran-rouhani-
internet-3g-4g-supreme-leader-ali-khamenei/), reports like this one perpetuate
a feeling of overall uncertainty among many users and open Internet advocates
in the country.

