[![Labour for Scottish Independence; photo by Màrtainn MacDhòmhnaill, used
under a CC BY-NC 2.0 license. ](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2014/09/scots-800x600.jpg)](https://www.flickr.com/photos/martainn/8016905208)

Labour for Scottish Independence; photo by Màrtainn MacDhòmhnaill, used under
a CC BY-NC 2.0 license.

As former colonies and current members of [the
Commonwealth](http://thecommonwealth.org/member-countries), a group that
comprises the United Kingdom and states that were once part of its empire,
including dependencies, the Caribbean is taking a particularly keen interest
in the Scottish referendum on independence from the UK. The [move towards
independence](http://www.snp.org/) is being pushed by [The Scottish National
Party](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Scottish_National_Party), which won 2011's
Scottish parliamentary election by a definitive margin.

Proponents of the “Yes” vote maintain that the centuries-old union no longer
meets modern-day needs. They feel like what West Indians refer to as the
“outside child” of the UK parliament and think that Scotland can be better
served by using its economic strength (primarily derived from oil and gas
revenues) for its own interests.

“catch a fire”, a blog run by a Bermudian resident who can and will vote in
this Thursday's referendum, thought that a vote for independence could have a
strong impact on Bermuda. He noted that the British overseas territory
actually held a referendum on independence in 1995, but “in general, support
for Bermudian independence has hovered at around 25-30% – […] a minority
position.” The blogger suggested that despite “the potential loss of the
colonial carrots of home tuition and EU [European Union] citizenship, the
Scottish independence movement – and actual Scottish independence in the event
of a Yes vote – has the [potential to captivate the
imagination](http://www.newstatesman.com/politics/2014/09/independence-
scottish-mind-has-shown-failure-british-nationalism) of Bermudians about the
potential of Bermudian independence.”

The UK, in its current formation (of which Scotland is an integral part),
offers many benefits to the Caribbean under the umbrella of the [Commonwealth
of Nations](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Commonwealth_of_Nations). Member
states cooperate with one another on issues of democracy, including things
like human rights, international peace, transparency, good governance and
sustainable development, values which are enshrined in the [Commonwealth
Charter](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Charter_of_the_Commonwealth). The group
is also supportive of the needs of smaller and more economically vulnerable
member states.

With this in mind, a guest post by Sir Ronald Sanders at Barbadian diaspora
blog [The Bajan Reporter](http://www.bajanreporter.com/2014/09/scotlands-
september-18-referendum-its-consequences-by-sir-ronald-
sanders/?utm_source=feedburner&utm_medium=feed&utm_campaign=Feed%3A+TheBajanReporter+%28The+Bajan+Reporter%29)
called Scottish independence “a one-way ticket to their own misfortune, and
with consequences that will go beyond their borders”:

> For countries in the Caribbean, a shrunken UK has several consequences. One
> of them is as basic as contributions to the Commonwealth Secretariat and its
> Fund for Technical Cooperation. […] The 12 Commonwealth Caribbean countries
> also need a strong UK in the European Community and in the Organization for
> Economic Cooperation and Development as an advocate for Caribbean interests
> […] there are a host of economic linkages including tourism, investment and
> development assistance that a less well-off UK will certainly be forced to
> curtail.

