[![Demonstrators gather at US embassy in London. Photo by Sudanese Tribune via
Flickr \(CC BY-NC-SA 2.0\)](https://advocacy.globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2013/10/Sudan-demonstrators-London.-Photo-by-Sudan-Tribune--
800x581.png)](http://www.flickr.com/photos/93456065@N06/8692996304/sizes/l/)

Demonstrators gather at US embassy in London. Photo by Sudanese Tribune via
Flickr (CC BY-NC-SA 2.0)

**[Hae-in Lim](https://advocacy.globalvoicesonline.org/author/Hae-in-Lim/),
[Lisa Ferguson](https://advocacy.globalvoicesonline.org/author/lisa-
ferguson/), [Ellery Roberts
Biddle](https://advocacy.globalvoicesonline.org/author/ellery-roberts-
biddle/), and[ Sarah
Myers](https://advocacy.globalvoicesonline.org/author/sarahbmyers/)
contributed to this report.**

Global Voices Advocacy's Netizen Report offers an international snapshot of
challenges, victories, and emerging trends in Internet rights around the
world. We begin this report in Sudan, where an Internet shutdown last week
marked the largest blackout of its kind since the height of citizen uprisings
in Egypt in 2011.

**Free Expression: Two Internets Go Dark**

There was an [“almost total” blackout
](http://www.pcworld.com/article/2049720/sudan-comes-back-online-after-24hour-
internet-blackout.html)in Sudan for 24 hours last week, in what many believe
was a government response to youth demonstrations against the ruling regime.
According to the [Sudan
Tribune](http://sudantribune.com/spip.php?article48192), the Sudanese embassy
in the US issued an official statement denying government involvement in the
shutdown and saying that protesters set fire to a Canar Telecommunications
Company building, causing damage to national networks and ultimately causing a
blackout. US-based network monitoring firm
[Renesys](http://www.renesys.com/2013/09/internet-blackout-sudan/) said it
could not determine who was responsible for the shutdown, but suggested that
government actors were the most likely source. Observing that the blackout
affected all major ISPs in the country (of which Canar is one), Renesys senior
analyst Doug Madory described the event as “either a government-directed thing
or some very catastrophic technological failure that just happen[ed] to
coincide with violent riots happening in the city.” The last Internet blackout
of this magnitude took place in Egypt in 2011.

In an [article](http://www.politicalanalysis.co.za/2013/09/23/the-problem-of-
free-expression-in-gambia/) that outlines threats to free expression and other
fundamental rights presented by amendments to Gambia’s Information and
Communication Act, Annette Theron wrote that the law “contributes to the
perception of Gambia as a country which has some of the worst restrictions on
the freedom of expression in the continent.”

**Thuggery: Journalist Arrested for Piracy (the Real Kind)**

Numerous independent media sites in Russia [went
dark](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2013/09/28/russian-news-websites-black-
out-to-protest-journalists-arrest/) last week to show their support for the
release of photo journalist Denis Sinyakov, a detained opposition activist and
friend of the controversial punk group Pussy Riot. Sinyakov was arrested along
with 29 other activists, mainly affiliated with Greenpeace, who were
protesting oil industry activities in the Barents Sea aboard a boat. The
Russian coast guard arrested the activists, claiming they were engaging in
piracy.

**Surveillance: Spying Does Happen in Brazil**

An [interactive infographic](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2013/09/28/ibm-
cisco-supply-brazil-with-surveillence-tools-for-world-cup/) from Agência
Pública shows which companies profit from the world espionage market and how
surveillance tools are used in Brazil. According to market research firm [IMS
Research](http://www.imsresearch.com/), Brazil is one of the biggest market
for video surveillance systems in Latin America. The study notes that both
government actors and private companies are increasing their surveillance
capabilities in anticipation of the 2016 Olympics, which will take place in
Rio de Janeiro, and the 2014 World Cup, which will have games throughout the
country.

According to the latest Snowden leak reported by the New York Times, the [NSA
has been gathering data on U.S. citizens’ social
connections](http://www.nytimes.com/2013/09/29/us/nsa-examines-social-
networks-of-us-citizens.html?pagewanted=all).

**Privacy: Indian Supreme Court Balks at Biometrics**

On September 25, 2013, the Supreme Court of India [struck down the practice of
requiring an Aadhaar ID
card](http://articles.economictimes.indiatimes.com/2013-09-24/news/42361396_1_aadhar-
illegal-immigrants-uid) to receive government services. A biometric
identification system incorporating iris, fingerprint, and face scans,
[Aadhaar](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Aadhar) has been touted as a program
that would allow the Indian government to carry out a range of social welfare
programs—from direct cash transfers for public school teachers to mobile
banking for the “unbanked” to marriage registration—with minimal obstruction
from third parties and corrupt middlemen. The Delhi government, which has
reportedly achieved [near-universal
registration](http://economictimes.indiatimes.com/news/politics-and-
nation/almost-100-pc-enrolment-for-aadhaar-card-in-delhi-sheila-
dikshit/articleshow/23116017.cms), is expected to [request the Supreme Court
rule Aadhar “mandatory for social welfare
schemes”](http://www.ndtv.com/article/india/aadhar-card-not-mandatory-upset-
government-wants-supreme-court-to-modify-order-423338) involving subsidies and
cash transfers like the [Annashree Yojna
scheme](http://articles.economictimes.indiatimes.com/2013-09-24/news/42361387_1_aadhaar-
cards-monthly-cash-subsidy-aadhaar-platform), which provides a monthly cash
subsidy to families that meet certain residency and economic criteria.

**Internet Insecurity: Peruvian Congress Skirts Civil Liberties, Public
Interest**

In a swift move that surprised and infuriated advocates, Peru’s Congress
passed the controversial [IT Crimes
Act,](https://es.globalvoicesonline.org/2013/09/25/peru-aprobaron-la-ley-de-
delitos-informaticos-ley-beingolea-2-0/) a law that has been [widely
criticized](http://www.hiperderecho.org/2013/09/congreso-aprueba-la-ley-de-
delitos-informaticos-en-secreto-y-en-tiempo-record/) as a threat to free
expression and privacy in Peru. Lawmakers reportedly added new language to the
act just minutes before the vote, leaving the public unable to respond to the
changes. Commonly known as the Beingolea Law (named for Senator Alberto
Beingolea, its original author), the law places tight restrictions on file
sharing and data storage and covers a range of other areas, including data
breaches, spam, and identity theft. The law must be approved by President
Ollanta Humala before being put into force.

**Industry: Moderate Your Own Comments, Says YouTube**

YouTube [introduced](http://gigaom.com/2013/09/24/youtube-adds-advanced-
moderation-google-to-comments-to-get-rid-of-the-trolls/) advanced moderation
features for comments, which will enable channel owners to block users and
even ban comments with certain keywords. Comments from the video owner and
“popular personalities” will be put on top, but users will still be able to
vote on comments.

**Open Source: Happy Birthday to GNU!**

This month marks the thirtieth birthday of the
[GNU](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/GNU) free and open source computer
operating system, developed by Richard Stallman in 1983. Learn more about it
by taking action with [GNU-a-Day](https://www.gnu.org/gnu30/).

**Cool Things**

At “Diplohack” at [the Hub](http://westminster.impacthub.net/) in Westminster,
UK, diplomats and NGO representatives gathered to brainstorm [how creative
collaboration in the arts can enhance freedom of
speech](http://arstechnica.com/business/2013/09/diplomat-ngo-hackathon-
tackles-freedom-of-speech-and-sustainability/).

A remarkable though somewhat disturbing [new
website](http://www.pbs.org/newshour/rundown/2013/09/artist-
collects-12-billion-photos-of-faces-from-facebook.html) features photos of the
faces of 1.2 billion Facebook users. Graphic designer Natalie Rojas has placed
the photos in chronological order, according to the dates of people's Facebook
registration.

**Publications and Studies**

  * “[Iranian Internet Infrastructure and Policy Report: July – August 2013](http://smallmedia.org.uk/sites/default/files/u8/iiipjuly.pdf)” – Small Media

[Subscribe to the Netizen Report by
email](http://feedburner.google.com/fb/a/mailverify?uri=NetizenReport)

