[![Image by Xeni Jardin via Flickr \(CC BY-NC-
SA\)](https://advocacy.globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2012/06/Telecom_main-375x280.jpg)](http://www.flickr.com/photos/xeni/397163659/sizes/m/in/photostream/)

Image by Xeni Jardin via Flickr (CC BY-NC-SA)

**Most of this report was researched, written, and edited by[Tom
Risen](https://advocacy.globalvoicesonline.org/author/tomrisen/), [Weiping
Li](https://advocacy.globalvoicesonline.org/author/weiping-li/), [James
Losey](https://advocacy.globalvoicesonline.org/author/jameswlosey/), and
[Sarah Myers](https://advocacy.globalvoicesonline.org/author/sarahbmyers/).**

In countries whose governments disrespect free speech and privacy, the
introduction of new telecommunications (telecoms) infrastructure generally
creates a new layer of censorship and surveillance. One of the latest examples
is Ethiopia. Last week [Ethio Telecom](http://www.ethionet.et/), the sole
telecommunication service provider in Ethiopia,
[announced](http://www.2merkato.com/201205271256/ethiopias-telecom-re-
launches-3g-network) a plan to relaunch its 3G wireless network to improve the
quality and speed of Internet connections. However
[Tor](https://www.torproject.org/), a project which supports anonymous online
communication, recently [found](https://blog.torproject.org/blog/ethiopia-
introduces-deep-packet-inspection) that Ethio Telecom has deployed or begun
testing [Deep Packet
Inspection](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Deep_packet_inspection) (DPI) of all
Internet traffic, and has also blocked Tor. The Tor team has since developed a
[workaround](https://blog.torproject.org/blog/update-censorship-ethiopia) for
users in Ethiopia.

This latest move to deepen censorship and surveillance comes on the heels of
[last month's ratification](https://endalk.wordpress.com/2012/05/28/the-new-
ethiopian-telecom-service-infringements-law-is-it-the-most-creative-way-
copying-sopa-and-pipa/) of the Ethiopian Telecom Service Infringement Law,
which is meant to impede Internet telephony such as Voice over Internet
Protocol (VoIP) calls and faxes. As the use of computer-to-telephone call
services is expanding in Addis Ababa, legislators have argued that the trend
not only threatens the profits of Ethio Telecom, but also poses a threat to
national security. The law also includes anti-terrorism and anti-defamation
provisions, which bloggers fear will dampen free expression in Ethiopia's
thriving blogging culture. ********

**Censorship**

On the eve of the 23rd anniversary of the [Tiananmen Square
massacre](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tiananmen_Square_protests_of_1989), the
Chinese government
[escalated](http://www.nytimes.com/2012/06/05/world/asia/anniversary-of-
tiananmen-crackdown-echos-through-shanghai-market.html?_r=1&hp) its
[crackdown](http://blogs.wsj.com/chinarealtime/2012/06/04/chinas-online-
firefighters-snuff-discussion-on-tiananmen-anniversary/?mod=WSJBlog) on
discussion of the tragedy. Sina Weibo, the popular Chinese microblogging
platform,
[banned](http://cn.fmnnow.com/2012/06/01/nhk%E6%96%B0%E6%B5%AA%E5%BE%AE%E5%8D%9A%E5%9B%A0%E5%8F%91%E5%B8%83%E5%A4%A9%E5%AE%89%E9%97%A8%E6%AF%8D%E4%BA%B2%E6%B6%88%E6%81%AF%E8%A2%AB%E7%A6%81%E8%A8%80/)
the account of Japanese public TV channel NHK for posting for a message on
Weibo about the Tiananmen anniversary. A large number of Hong Kong Facebook
accounts were
[deactivated](https://advocacy.globalvoicesonline.org/2012/06/02/hong-kong-a-
large-number-of-facebook-user-accounts-suspended-at-the-eve-of-annual-
june-4-vigil/) soon after they posted political messages about a candlelight
vigil commemorating the massacre. [Note: The Netizen Report has learned that a
Facebook executive told several activists that the reason for the deactivation
was caused by a global technical problem which has now been fixed – and had
nothing to do with local political events or actions. However, to our
knowledge Facebook has made no public statement explaining what happened.]

Last week, Sina Weibo also introduced new rules to control its users.
According to the rules, Sina will establish content requirements for Weibo
posts and “[community
committees](http://chinacopyrightandmedia.wordpress.com/2012/05/31/time-for-
weibo-community-service/)” to judge on cases violating these requirements. The
system will operate on a [points system](http://en.rsf.org/china-weibo-
microblog-users-to-be-29-05-2012,42689.html), which will adjudicate the
actions Sina will take to punish violations.

Last week, a netizen in China's northwestern province of Xinjiang was
[detained](http://gb.cri.cn/27824/2012/06/04/882s3712653.htm) for 15 days for
spreading the news of a youth’s death in a detention facility.

To alert Chinese users of censorship, Google has announced that it will
incorporate [new tools](http://insidesearch.blogspot.com/2012/05/better-
search-in-mainland-china.html) into its search engine that indicate when
sensitive search terms are typed in.

Malaysia has [amended](http://e27.sg/2012/06/01/darker-internet-days-for-
malaysians-as-government-amends-evidence-act-shifts-burden-of-proof-to-
website-owners/) its Evidence Act, shifting the burden of proof to website
owners to prove their innocence and making them responsible for abusive or
politically incorrect comments.

Malawi’s government [removed](http://www.cpj.org/2012/05/cpj-welcomes-malawis-
repeal-of-news-censorship-law.php#more) an amendment to its penal code that
would have banned all news content “not in the public interest,” bowing to
pressure from the same press freedom advocates that prevented the amendment
from being implemented after it was passed in 2010.

The South African City Press was forced by the African National Congress to
[remove an image](http://www.indexoncensorship.org/2012/05/south-africa-
newspaper-drops-controversial-image-of-president-from-website/) of a
controversial portrait of President Jacob Zuma on its website.

Wikipedia Co-Founder Larry Sanger called for better awareness that some
Wikipedia entries include [adult content
](http://larrysanger.org/2012/05/what-should-we-do-about-wikipedias-porn-
problem/)and advocates the creation of a pornography filter. **** ****

**Thuggery**

Bahraini human rights activist Nabeel Rajab, charged with inciting illegal
rallies online, was[ released
](https://advocacy.globalvoicesonline.org/2012/05/28/nabeel-rajab-the-
struggle-continues/)on bail last week, then [arrested
again](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2012/06/06/bahrain-activist-nabeel-
rajab-arrested-over-tweets/) this week.

[Fox News reports](http://www.foxnews.com/world/2012/06/04/israel-asks-arab-
visitors-to-open-emails-to-search/) that agents at Israel's international
airport have been requiring some people of Palestinian descent to open up
their emails for search before being allowed into the country.

**National policy**

The [Dutch parliament ](https://www.bof.nl/2012/05/29/translations-of-dutch-
parliamentary-resolutions-against-acta/)voted against the Anti-Counterfeiting
Trade Agreement (ACTA), placing it back at the top of the agenda for the
European Union (EU) parliament to determine whether 20 European signatory
nations will be able to institute the treaty. Three EU [committees
](http://arstechnica.com/tech-policy/2012/05/reeling-acta-treaty-rejected-by-
three-european-parliament-committees/)also voted not to recommend adoption of
the treaty, and the [next vote](http://www.zdnet.com/blog/london/eu-sends-
strongest-signal-yet-to-reject-acta/5039) by the EU’s Committee on
International Trade on June 21 could determine the outcome of the final vote
in July.

By the end of 2012, the European Commission will draft proposals to institute
[net neutrality](http://euobserver.com/871/116430), following a report that
indicates between 20 and 50 percent of Europeans have their online access
restricted by their Internet Service Providers (ISP).

China’s CNNIC altered its
[policy](http://www1.cnnic.cn/html/Dir/2012/05/28/6041.htm) and again will
allow individuals to register domain names. The organization has not allowed
individuals to register domain names since 2009.

**Internet governance**

Panelists and members of the United States (US) House of Representatives
Energy and Commerce Subcommittee on Communications and Technology [expressed
opposition](http://netizenproject.org/2012/05/30/house-committee-opposes-u-n-
internet-governance/) to expanding the United Nations’ control over the
Internet. Such a move would hold profound and hazardous implications for the
future of the Internet, said [Vint
Cerf](http://republicans.energycommerce.house.gov/Media/file/Hearings/Telecom/20120531/HHRG-112-IF16-WState-
CerfV-20120531.pdf), the computer scientist known as “the father of the
Internet” for his work in the 1970s with the US Defense Department.

Digital freedom non-profit organisation Access is close to collecting [20,000
signatures](https://www.accessnow.org/page/s/itu) on a petition for the
International Telecommunications Union (ITU) requesting it not expand its
control over the Internet.

Technology researchers Jerry Brito and Eli Dourado [have launched
](http://jerrybrito.org/post/24541436396/today-were-launching-wcitleaks-org)a
new website, [WCITleaks.org](http://wcitleaks.org/), a platform for the
publication of leaked documents related to the ITU and its upcoming [World
Conference on International
Communications](http://www.itu.int/en/wcit-12/Pages/default.aspx) to be held
in Dubai in December 2012, at which proposals related to extending the ITU's
authority over the Internet will be discussed.

The non-profit [Internet Corporation for Assigned Names and
Numbers](http://www.icann.org/) (ICANN) has collected approximately 2,000
[applications](http://www.brandchannel.com/home/post/2012/06/04/ICANN-
Internet-gTLD-060412.aspx) for new generic top-level domain names and will
reveal the winners on [June 13,](http://www.v3.co.uk/v3-uk/news/2181297/icann-
unveil-gltd-winners-june-900-applications) with an appeal and dispute period
to follow until August 12. **** ****

**Internet activism**

The Knight Foundation
[awarded](http://www.miamiherald.com/2012/06/03/2831223/south-florida-group-
wins-grant.html) a grant to a Miami-area high school project to connect online
with undocumented immigrant students and let them know about their
opportunities for higher education.

Members of hacktivist groups Anonymous and Telecomix differ on their approach
to helping protesters in nations such as Syria, yet the Swedish-based group
Telecomix
[claims](http://www.globalpost.com/dispatch/news/business/technology/120531/anonymous-
telecomix-hackers-arab-spring) to have more of a defined political strategy.

Wikileaks Founder Julian Assange, who has been under house arrest in the
United Kingdom for rape allegations, [lost his
case](http://www.guardian.co.uk/media/blog/2012/may/30/julian-assange-
extradition-verdict-live-coverage#block-25) in a British court about whether
he could be extradited to Sweden to face the charges. He will have to decide
whether to request an appeal. Despite slow activity on the website because of
recent legal and political troubles, the whistleblowing culture it helped
galvanize [continues](http://techpresident.com/news/22253/wikileaks-struggles-
copycats-die-online-whistle-blowing-thrives).

Following Reddit’s 12-hour blackout in 2011 to protest the [Stop Online Piracy
Act](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Stop_Online_Piracy_Act) (SOPA), Reddit’s
founder Alexis Ohanian has partnered with the advocacy group Fight for the
Future to form the [Internet Defense
League](http://www.forbes.com/sites/andygreenberg/2012/05/25/reddit-founder-
and-activists-aim-to-build-a-bat-signal-for-the-internet/) to bring attention
to other efforts to expand Internet governance. They call the effort “a bat
signal for the Internet” for other websites to cooperate with to advocate
against legislation such as the Cyber Intelligence Sharing and Protection Act
(CISPA) and to “make sure the Internet never loses- ever.”

Inspired by the electoral success of the digital liberty-focused [Pirate
Party](http://www.worldcrunch.com/pirates-about-embark-french-parliament/5488)
in the recent German elections, some French citizens are seeking to establish
their own version of the party ahead of parliamentary elections. **** ****

**Privacy**

According to the “[When the government comes knocking, who has your
back](https://www.eff.org/pages/who-has-your-back)?” report surveyed by the
[Electronic Frontier Foundation](https://www.eff.org/), an independent ISP in
California, [Sonic.net](http://sonic.net/), is the Internet company which
provides the best protection over customers’ privacy against governments’
requests for user data.

The European Commission is [referring
](http://www.pcworld.com/businesscenter/article/256571/germany_taken_to_court_for_failing_to_implement_data_retention.html)Germany
to the European Court of Justice because the country has failed to implement a
EU rule demanding the Internet and phone companies to keep records of users’
emails and phone calls.

Facebook has opened up a
[vote](https://apps.facebook.com/fbsitegovernancevote/contests/230120) on
users’ proposed changes to its “Statement of Rights and Responsibilities” and
the social network's “Data Use Policy.” The vote started June 1 and will end
at 9 am PDT on June 8. In order for the changes to be binding, over 30% of the
Facebook user base [must
participate](http://www.pcmag.com/article2/0,2817,2405223,00.asp) in the
voting. **** ****

**Cybersecurity**

An article in the New York Times[ reveals
](http://www.nytimes.com/2012/06/01/world/middleeast/obama-ordered-wave-of-
cyberattacks-against-iran.html)that the US government and Israel coordinated
an effort to undermine the Iranian nuclear program through the Stuxnet virus.
Meanwhile, Iran
[announced](http://www.certcc.ir/index.php?name=news&file=article&sid=1894)
that computers in the country have been attacked by a more harmful form of
malware than Stuxnet, called “Flame.” The Flame virus is designed for [cyber
espionage](http://netprophet.tol.org/2012/06/03/russian-team-uncovers-stuxnet-
on-steroids/) rather than cyber warfare. The UAE and Saudi Arabia have also
reported that they have [detected](http://www.thenews.com.pk/Todays-
News-1-112602-Flame-virus-detected-in-UAE) the same virus in their computers.

Simurgh, an important software used by the Iranian and Syrian Internet users
to circumvent censorship has a [malicious
version](http://citizenlab.org/2012/05/iranian-anti-censorship-software-
simurgh-circulated-with-malicious-backdoor-2/#May30update), which plants
backdoors in victims’ computers. ********

**Publications and studies**

  * King, Gary, Jennifer Pan, and Molly Roberts: [How Censorship in China Allows Government Criticism but Silences Collective Expression](http://gking.harvard.edu/publications/how-censorship-china-allows-government-criticism-silences-collective-expression)
  * Aaron Smith and Joanna Brenner: [Twitter Use 2012](http://pewinternet.org/Reports/2012/Twitter-Use-2012.aspx)
  * David Fidler for the American Society of International Law: [The Internet, Human Rights, and U.S. Foreign Policy: The Global Online Freedom Act of 2012](http://www.asil.org/insights120524.cfm)

For upcoming events related to the future of citizen rights in the digital
age, see the[ Global Voices Events
Calendar](https://www.google.com/calendar/embed?src=9o8so5err9tvamd9t0ri9t181o%40group.calendar.google.com&ctz=America/New_York).

_**[Subscribe to the Netizen Report by
email](http://feedburner.google.com/fb/a/mailverify?uri=NetizenReport)**_

