**Most of this report was researched, written, and edited by[Lisa
Ferguson](https://advocacy.globalvoicesonline.org/author/lisa-ferguson/), Hae-
in Lim, Yuqi Chen, [Alex
Laverty](https://advocacy.globalvoicesonline.org/author/alexlaverty/), Ellery
Roberts Biddle, and[ Sarah
Myers](https://advocacy.globalvoicesonline.org/author/sarahbmyers/).**

Global Voices Advocacy's Netizen Report offers an international snapshot of
challenges, victories, and emerging trends in Internet rights around the
world. This week we begin in the US, where military officer and whistleblower
Bradley Manning has been convicted of multiple charges of espionage. We then
move to the MENA region, where bloggers in Saudi Arabia and Bahrain are facing
new threats from government.

**Freedom of Information**

A US military court
[convicted](http://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/jul/30/bradley-manning-
wikileaks-judge-verdict) military officer Bradley Manning of 20 out of 22
charges filed against him, including multiple charges under the [Espionage Act
of 1917](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Espionage_Act_of_1917).

[![Bradley Manning. Photo by US Army. Released to public
domain.](https://advocacy.globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2013/07/Screen-
shot-2013-07-31-at-11.49.30-AM-296x300.png)](http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Bradley_Manning_US_Army.jpg)

Bradley Manning. Photo by US Army. Released to public domain.

Prosecuted by the US government for leaking over 700,000 classified documents
and other media to transparency platform WikiLeaks, Manning has been
[imprisoned](http://www.huffingtonpost.com/2013/07/31/bradley-manning-
prison_n_3682212.html) and held in solitary confinement since his arrest in
2010. Manning was found not guilty of “aiding the enemy,” the most
controversial charge brought against him, but could still face a lifetime in
prison. A [sentencing
hearing](http://www.aljazeera.com/news/americas/2013/07/2013731134339822922.html)
for Manning begins today.

In The Guardian, [Dan
Gillmor](http://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2013/jul/30/bradley-manning-
verdict-bad-news-for-journalists) and [Yochai
Benkler](http://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2013/jul/19/bradley-manning-
trial-aiding-the-enemy-charge) commented on what the verdict means for
national security journalism in the United. Benkler described the decision as
setting a “chilling precedent” for future cases.

The [Bradley Manning Support Network](http://www.bradleymanning.org) is
publishing frequent updates on court proceedings and reactions to the news.

**Thuggery**

Blogger and Global Voices contributor [Mohamed
Hassan](https://globalvoicesonline.org/author/mohamed-hassan/) was [arrested
in Bahrain](https://advocacy.globalvoicesonline.org/2013/07/31/freesafy-
bahrain-arrests-blogger-in-dawn-raid/) today in an early morning raid on his
home. On Twitter, individuals reported police seized Hassan's computer and
cell phone. Hassan, known in the blogosphere as Safy, stopped blogging in
April of 2013. Supporters are communicating about his arrest using the hashtag
[#FreeSafy](https://twitter.com/search?q=%23FreeSafy&src=hash).

A Saudi court [convicted activist](http://www.hrw.org/news/2013/07/30/saudi-
arabia-600-lashes-7-years-activist) and Free Saudi Liberals website founder
Raif Badawi of violating the country's anti-cybercrime law. Badawi, who was
found guilty of “insulting Islam”, was sentenced to 600 lashes and seven years
in prison.

Syrian security forces [arrested and
jailed](http://www.voanews.com/content/reu-middle-east-artists-demand-freedom-
for-syrian-painter-youssef-abdelke/1709366.html) 62 year-old Syrian artist
[Youssef Abdelke](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Youssef_Abdelke) last week
after he signed a [declaration](http://www.babelmed.net/cultura-e-
societa/48-syria/13391-declaration-pour-syrie-democratique.html) demanding the
ouster of President Bashar al-Assad and a UN-supervised transition to an
interim government. His wife, a prominent filmmaker, launched a [Facebook
campaign](https://www.facebook.com/events/258608904264261/) calling for his
release. Over 700 writers, artists, academics, and journalists from the region
have signed the petition, including prominent artists [Serwan
Baran](http://www.serwan.com/) and [Ayman
Baalbaki](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ayman_Baalbaki).

In [better news](http://www.reuters.com/article/2013/07/30/us-kuwait-ruler-
pardon-idUSBRE96T17P20130730?feedType=RSS&feedName=worldNews), Kuwait's Emir
[issued a pardon](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2013/07/30/kuwaiti-emir-
pardons-those-who-insulted-him/) to dozens of individuals who had been
arrested and prosecuted for insulting him on Twitter.

**Free Expression**

Numerous reports held that bulk SMS messages were being [blocked in
Zimbabwe](http://news.yahoo.com/cat-mouse-zimbabwes-election-cyber-
war-162612333.html) ahead of general elections in the country, which take
place today, July 31. [Inquiries to
Econet](http://allafrica.com/stories/201307270067.html), a major mobile
service provider in the country, revealed that the country's Posts and
Telecommunications Regulatory Authority requested that providers block bulk
messages coming from outside the country “for political reasons.”

The UK government has [mandated](http://www.huffingtonpost.com/2013/07/29/uk-
internet-filter-block-more-than-porn_n_3670771.html) that all Internet Service
Providers install filters that will target adult pornographic content for
users who do not deliberately “opt out” of this service by January 1, 2014. UK
NGO [Open Rights Group](https://www.openrightsgroup.org/blog/2013/porn-blocks-
edging-away-from-active-choice) has warned that these will “reach far beyond
pornography,” leading to the de facto censorship of age-appropriate content.

British PM David Cameron is concurrently pursuing more aggressive methods for
stopping the circulation of child pornography online. [Observers have
noted](http://www.theguardian.com/technology/2013/jul/22/david-cameron-
crusade-internet-pornography) that Internet and online service providers
already take great pains to eliminate child pornography, which is illegal in
nearly every country in the world, from their networks.

The Chinese government is working to defend youth from “[spiritual
pollution](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Anti-Spiritual_Pollution_Campaign)”
with a new anti-pornography campaign. Porn websites, online games,
advertisements, blogs, and social networks can now be [shut
down](http://news.xinhuanet.com/english/china/2013-07/16/c_125018862.htm) for
hosting pornographic content. Critics claim that targeted content will “[run
the gamut from porn to wayward
politics](http://latitude.blogs.nytimes.com/2013/07/26/beijings-play-for-
porn/).”

The Committee to Protect Journalists has
[urged](http://www.cpj.org/2013/07/obama-must-urge-climate-of-free-press-in-
visit-wit.php) Barack Obama to discuss on press and online freedom issues
during his upcoming visit to Vietnam. The Vietnamese government has introduced
various restrictive Internet policies in recent years; thirty-six bloggers are
currently imprisoned in Vietnam.

**Surveillance**

Digital rights advocacy groups Electronic Frontier Foundation, Privacy
International, and Access Now launched a set of
[principles](https://en.necessaryandproportionate.org/text) for human rights-
protective communications surveillance practices for governments worldwide.
118 NGOs have endorsed the principles, which are currently available in
multiple languages including
[Spanish](https://es.necessaryandproportionate.org/text),
[Polish](https://pl.necessaryandproportionate.org/text), and
[Russian](https://ru.necessaryandproportionate.org/text).

Members of the US Congress voted on an amendment that would end Congressional
funding for certain controversial surveillance programs run by the National
Security Agency (NSA). A group of Internet activists set up the site
[DefundtheNSA.com](http://defundthensa.com) in an [effort to
influence](http://mashable.com/2013/07/23/internet-activists-call-for-
defunding-the-nsa-ahead-of-congress-vote/) the vote. The measure was narrowly
defeated [205 to 217](http://www.theverge.com/2013/7/24/4554420/nsa-amendment-
defeated-allowing-agency-to-keep-spying).

A team of researchers at University of Toronto have developed
[IXmaps](http://www.ixmaps.ca/index.php), an interactive tool (and
[video](https://vimeo.com/67102223)) that maps the path of data packets as
they traverse the Internet. The map shows how nearly all of the United States’
Internet traffic passes through one or more of 18 US cities and explains that
the NSA can perform comprehensive surveillance of American Internet users by
setting up
[splitters](http://www.ixmaps.ca/faq.php#Splitter%20Cabinet%20%287th%20Floor%29)
at these exchange points.

**Cybersecurity**

New reports confirmed that intelligence and defense service providers in
Australia, the US, the UK, Canada, and New Zealand have
[banned](http://www.afr.com/p/technology/spy_agencies_ban_lenovo_pcs_on_security_HVgcKTHp4bIA4ulCPqC7SL)
the use of Lenovo computers on “secret” or “top secret” networks since the
mid-2000s. Government security agents feared that “malicious circuits” and
insecure [firmware](http://www.wisegeek.org/what-is-firmware.htm#slideshow) in
Lenovo computer chips could generate security threats. Lenovo, a Chinese
company that is the world's largest manufacturer of personal computers, said
it was unaware of the ban. The company continues to supply computers to
Western governments for unclassified networks.

**Cool Things**

Data-visualisation designer Ruslan Enikeev has created an [Internet
map](http://www.dailymail.co.uk/sciencetech/article-2379970/Map-internet-The-
world-wide-web-recreated-look-like-galaxy-planets-revealing-size-different-
websites.html) that contains [350,0000 different website
planets](http://internet-map.net/) Internet users across the globe that
received the most clicks. The size and color of the “planet” is tied to
traffic and country of origin, while all “planets” were mapped according to
the relationships to others. Google, Facebook, YouTube, and Yahoo! are among
the biggest planets on the map.

**Publications and Studies**

  * [Throttling Dissent: China’s New Leaders Refine Internet Control](http://www.freedomhouse.org/report/special-reports/throttling-dissent-chinas-new-leaders-refine-internet-control) – Freedom House

  * [Opening the Lines: A Call for Transparency from Governments and Telecommunications Companies](http://globalnetworkinitiative.org/sites/default/files/GNI_OpeningtheLines.pdf) – Global Network Initiative

[Subscribe to the Netizen Report by
email](http://feedburner.google.com/fb/a/mailverify?uri=NetizenReport)

For upcoming events related to the future of citizen rights in the digital
age, see the[ Global Voices Events
Calendar](https://www.google.com/calendar/embed?src=9o8so5err9tvamd9t0ri9t181o%40group.calendar.google.com&ctz=America/New_York).

