[![NSA Headquarters in Fort Meade, MD. Released to public
domain.](https://advocacy.globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2013/06/Screen-
Shot-2013-06-18-at-11.29.45-AM-375x294.png)](http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:National_Security_Agency_headquarters,_Fort_Meade,_Maryland.jpg)

NSA Headquarters in Fort Meade, MD. Released to public domain.

**Most of this report was researched, written, and edited by Yuqi Chen,[Ellery
Roberts Biddle](https://advocacy.globalvoicesonline.org/author/ellery-roberts-
biddle/), and[ Sarah
Myers](https://advocacy.globalvoicesonline.org/author/sarahbmyers/).**

Global Voices Advocacy's Netizen Report offers an international snapshot of
challenges, victories, and emerging trends in Internet rights around the
world. This week's report features a range of responses and reactions to new
information about phone and Internet surveillance programs run by the US
government.

**Surveillance**

Edward Snowden, the former National Security Agency (NSA) contractor
responsible for leaking information concerning US government surveillance
programs, said [he has not
given](http://www.nytimes.com/2013/06/18/world/asia/nsa-leaker-denies-giving-
classified-data-to-china.html?smid=tw-share&_r=0) any classified information
to the Chinese government. His comments were made in an [online
forum](http://www.guardian.co.uk/world/2013/jun/17/edward-snowden-nsa-files-
whistleblower) hosted on the Guardian’s website.

According to Der Spiegel, despite the turmoil caused by the leak of details
pertaining the NSA’s PRISM program, Germany’s foreign intelligence service
(BND) [plans to expand their surveillance program
](http://www.spiegel.de/international/germany/berlin-profits-from-us-spying-
program-and-is-planning-its-own-a-906129.html)with increased funding up to 100
million euros over the next five years. This notwithstanding, German
Chancellor Angela Merkel
[declared](http://www.theaustralian.com.au/news/breaking-news/merkel-says-
wants-answers-on-us-web-spies/story-fn3dxix6-1226665309652) that she would
push for greater transparency around surveillance practices in talks with US
President Barack Obama later this week.

In what UK-based news outlet The Register called “a masterpiece of timing,” a
Japanese government security advisory panel, the National Information Security
Center, is [seeking public
consultation](http://www.theregister.co.uk/2013/06/14/japan_nsa_internet_snooping_bad_timing/)
on a [report](http://www.shield.ne.jp/ssrc/topics/SSRC-ER-13-027-en.html) that
recommends the formation of an agency similar to the NSA to monitor Internet
communications.

**Sovereigns of Cyberspace**

Google published an [open letter](http://techpresident.com/news/24033/google-
justice-department-let-us-publish-national-security-requests) requesting the
US Justice Department allow the company to publish the “number and scope” of
national security-related data requests that it receives. Google currently
publishes information about law enforcement and copyright takedown requests
that it receives in its [Transparency
Report,](http://www.google.com/transparencyreport/) but domestic law prevents
the company from publishing US national security and Foreign Intelligence
Surveillance Act requests.

**Privacy**

In response to the PRISM program, computer security researcher [Moxie
Marlinspike](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Moxie_Marlinspike) wrote a blog post
titled [We Should All Have Something To
Hide](http://www.thoughtcrime.org/blog/we-should-all-have-something-to-hide/).
In his article, Moxie points out that many individuals aren’t concerned about
surveillance because they think they have nothing to hide, but in fact the
volume of information online could make it easy for government officials to
find violations of any number of outdated or trivial laws – such as possession
of a [lobster under a certain size](http://www1.american.edu/TED/LOBSTER.HTM).

**Netizen Activism**

Advocacy groups in the UK wrote an [open
letter](http://www.indexoncensorship.org/2013/06/index-condemns-surveillance-
of-british-citizens-communications-data/) to Prime Minister David Cameron,
condemning US government surveillance of British citizens and demanding strong
domestic protections for digital privacy.

An [international coalition of advocates](http://bestbits.net/prism-nsa/) is
urging the UN Human Rights Council to convene a special session to discuss
recent revelations concerning US government surveillance programs and to
develop recommendations for member states on protecting citizen privacy.

A group of Iranian bloggers and activists [wrote a
letter](https://docs.google.com/forms/d/1FPIXvam-
B_m8mciTS9VZrMk1EAhka3SdmkW5eUqOopE/viewform) to President-elect[ Hassan
Rouhani](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2013/06/16/iran-happy-my-vote-was-
counted-this-time-videos/), asking him to improve Internet infrastructure and
speed throughout the nation. They also complained of censorship and reminded
Rouhani that the Internet was a critical asset in his campaign.

**Censorship**

The British Board of Film Classification is developing a crowdsourced [film
rating program](http://www.guardian.co.uk/technology/2013/jun/16/censorship-
scheme-youtube-watchdogs-content) that aims to warn users of video content
deemed harmful or inappropriate for children. Professional and amateur film
posters alike will be able to rate films they put online with the “traffic
light system” wherein a green light signals content is suitable for all
viewers, amber denotes content appropriate for 12 and up, and red means
“adults only”. Rather than filtering content, the system will allow users to
make informed choices about videos before choosing to watch them. If
successful, the program could provide a strong non-regulatory answer to those
seeking to restrict online content in the interest of protecting children.

**Thuggery**

Ye Haiyan, a gender rights activist and sex worker who led an [online protest
of sexual assault on children,
](http://shanghaiist.com/2013/06/05/outspoken_sex-
worker_activist_ye_haiyan_imprisoned_for_chasing_off_intruders_with_meat_cleaver.php)was[
detained](http://shanghaiist.com/2013/06/12/activist_ye_haiyan_released_in_guangxi.php)
for a week by police in China's Guangxi Province after using a cleaver to
defend herself against a group of individuals who stormed her apartment in
response to the campaign.

**Copyright**

An initial draft of an anti-piracy bill termed [“Russian
SOPA”](https://advocacy.globalvoicesonline.org/2013/06/17/orphaned-in-us-sopa-
finds-home-in-russia/) was
[approved](http://www.themoscowtimes.com/news/article/duma-passes-anti-piracy-
bill-in-first-reading/481759.html) by the lower house of Russia’s parliament,
the Duma, despite massive protests from individual netizens and major Internet
corporations including Yandex, Russia’s biggest online search engine.

[A Chinese national was prosecuted for IP theft in a US court for the first
time.](http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/business-22867364) Xiang Li was arrested in
June 2011, in Saipan, and sentenced to 12 years in prison for stealing
software from 200 US manufacturers and selling pirated copies of the software
for over US$100 million.

**Cool Things**

Tunisia's Internet Agency, a government entity shrouded in secrecy during the
rule of Ben Ali, now houses the
[#404Lab](https://www.eff.org/deeplinks/2013/06/open-wi-fi-comes-tunisia-ex-
dictators-house-turned-openwirelessorg-hotspot) which will serve as a hub for
developers and other tech innovators in Tunis. The lab hosts an
[openwireless.org](https://openwireless.org/) connection, making it easy for
anyone in the building or nearby to get online.

Google [began testing](http://arstechnica.com/information-
technology/2013/06/google-flies-internet-balloons-in-stratosphere-for-a-
network-in-the-sky/) “[Project Loon](http://www.google.com/loon/),” balloon-
based wireless networks that seek to bring fast and affordable Internet
connectivity to rural and remote parts of the world.

**Publications and Studies**

  * [The Great Firewall and the Peril of Censorship in Modern China](http://yalejournal.org/2013/06/11/the-great-firewall-and-the-perils-of-censorship-in-modern-china/) – Yale Journal of International Affairs

  * [Spies Without Borders Series: Using Domestic Networks to Spy on the World](https://www.eff.org/deeplinks/2013/06/spy-without-borders) – Electronic Frontier Foundation

  * [Online Survival Kit for Journalists](https://www.wefightcensorship.org/online-survival-kithtml.html) – Reporters Without Borders

[Subscribe to the Netizen Report by
email](http://feedburner.google.com/fb/a/mailverify?uri=NetizenReport)

For upcoming events related to the future of citizen rights in the digital
age, see the[ Global Voices Events
Calendar](https://www.google.com/calendar/embed?src=9o8so5err9tvamd9t0ri9t181o%40group.calendar.google.com&ctz=America/New_York).

