[![Wikimedia](https://advocacy.globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2013/04/Wikimedia-300x300.png)](http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Wikimedia_Foundation_RGB_logo_with_text.svg#filelinks)

**Most of this report was researched, written, and edited by Lisa Ferguson,[
Weiping Li](https://advocacy.globalvoicesonline.org/author/weiping-li/),[ Alex
Laverty](https://advocacy.globalvoicesonline.org/author/alexlaverty/),[ Renata
Avila, Chan Myae Khine](https://globalvoicesonline.org/author/renata-avila/),[
Ellery Roberts Biddle](https://advocacy.globalvoicesonline.org/author/ellery-
roberts-biddle/), and[ Sarah
Myers](https://advocacy.globalvoicesonline.org/author/sarahbmyers/).**

Global Voices Advocacy's Netizen Report offers an international snapshot of
challenges, victories, and emerging trends in Internet rights around the
world. This week we focus on the Wikimedia Foundation, which is challenging
take down orders in both Russia and France, and chart a wave of threats
against netizens in Chad, Mexico, and various countries in the MENA region.

**Censorship**

[Roskomnazdor,](http://www.rsoc.ru/eng/) the Russian government agency
responsible for managing the nation’s blacklist of illegal websites, [has
blocked ten Wikipedia
articles](http://netprophet.tol.org/2013/04/12/wikipedias-suicide-mission-
against-russian-censors/) on topics related to narcotics and suicide.
Wikipedia’s article on cannabis has since seen its traffic increase by
13,000%. It appears unlikely that [Russian
Wikipedians](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2013/04/09/wikipedias-suicide-
mission-against-russian-censors/) will seek to reconcile the content to fit
Russian censorship laws. Wikipedia founder Jimmy Wales responded, saying
“catering to the demands of weak and cowardly politicians – the kind who fear
the spread of knowledge – is not the Wikipedia way.”

The[ Wikimedia Foundation](http://wikimediafoundation.org/wiki/Home)[
reported](http://blog.wikimedia.fr/dcri-threat-a-sysop-to-delete-a-wikipedia-
article-5493) that the [French Central Directorate of Interior
Intelligence](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Direction_centrale_du_renseignement_int%C3%A9rieur)
(DCRI) asked that the organization remove a French-language Wikipedia entry
about a French military compound, claiming it contained classified
information. After Wikimedia refused to grant the request, DCRI forced a
Wikipedia volunteer (who had not contributed to the article) to delete the
entry, threatening that he would be prosecuted if he refused to do so.

Athens Indymedia, a popular independent news website in Greece, has been [shut
down by Greek judicial
authorities](http://simonknowz.wordpress.com/2013/04/11/greek-government-
indymedia-shut-down/), according to tweets from a Greek Member of Parliament.
The website[ announced](http://indymedia.squat.gr/2013/04/to-athens-
indymedia-%ce%ba%ce%b1%ce%b9-%ce%bf-98fm-%ce%b2%cf%81%ce%af%cf%83%ce%ba%ce%bf%ce%bd%cf%84%ce%b1%ce%b9-%cf%85%cf%80%cf%8c-%ce%ba%ce%b1%cf%84%ce%b1%cf%83%cf%84%ce%bf%ce%bb%ce%ae/)
[el] it was being[
suppressed](http://simonknowz.wordpress.com/2013/04/11/greek-government-
indymedia-shut-down/) by the government, along with[ 98FM
radio](http://radio98fm.org/index/), and[ provided a Tor
link](http://indymedia.squat.gr/2013/04/to-athens-
indymedia-%ce%b4%ce%b9%ce%b1%ce%b8%ce%ad%cf%83%ce%b9%ce%bc%ce%bf-%cf%89%cf%82-%ce%ba%cf%81%cf%85%ce%bc%ce%bc%ce%ad%ce%bd%ce%b7-%cf%85%cf%80%ce%b7%cf%81%ce%b5%cf%83%ce%af%ce%b1-%cf%83%cf%84/)
[el] offering users an alternate method for accessing the site. In the past,
right-wing politicians have campaigned to block the site based on accusations
of anti-state incitement. Athens Indymedia was also [blocked last
September](http://www.bloko.gr/ellada/ekleisan-to-indymedia-me-metamesonyxtia-
efodo-sto-polytexneio.html) [el] and had several administrators arrested.

**Thuggery**

Chadian blogger Jean Laokolé was[
arrested](https://advocacy.globalvoicesonline.org/2013/04/09/chadian-blogger-
detained/) on March 22 and is currently being held in an undisclosed location,
according to[ Internet Without
Borders](http://www.internetsansfrontieres.com/Chad-Blogger-arrested-And-Held-
Incommunicado_a474.html). Known for his coverage of corruption and poor
governance, Laokolé was arrested for making allegedly “false accusations”
against a group of people who may have filed a complaint against him. Internet
Without Borders issued a[ petition](http://liberezlaokole.wesign.it/en) this
week calling for his release.[ Amnesty
International](http://www.amnesty.org/fr/library/asset/AFR20/001/2013/fr/5d560795-4c63-4ee3-868b-b6ea9192e20e/afr200012013en.html)
is soliciting letters of appeal for submission to the Chadian government.

[Two Tunisians were arrested](https://www.eff.org/deeplinks/2012/04/week-
censorship-troubling-developments-tunisia-palestine) and sentenced to seven
years in prison for “violation of morality and disturbing public order” after
posting cartoons of the Prophet Mohammed on Facebook.

In Egypt, [video blogger Ahmed Anwar](anhri.net/en/?p=12131 ) is being tried
for “insulting the Minister of the Interior” and “deliberate harassment of
others using communication techniques.” The [Association for Freedom of
Thought and Expression](http://www.en.afteegypt.org/) and the [Arabic Network
for Human Rights Information](http://www.anhri.net/en/) have both condemned
the charges and have called on the Egyptian government to end its persecution
of Internet activists.

An Iranian store owner was[ arrested](http://www.ncr-iran.org/en/news/human-
rights/13354-iranian-regime-arrests-man-for-selling-internet-filtering-
software.html) for selling illegal software that enabled Internet users to
access blocked websites. Iran[
outlawed](http://www.reuters.com/article/2013/03/10/iran-internet-
idUSL6N0C24M620130310) most [VPN
connections](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Virtual_private_network) last month
to prevent users from circumventing online censorship in the country.

The administrator of the Facebook and Twitter pages “Valor por Tamaulipas”
announced the [impending
closure](https://knightcenter.utexas.edu/en/node/13460) of both accounts after
[being threatened](http://www.proceso.com.mx/?p=338335) for reporting on drug-
related violence in northern Mexico. This comes after [flyers were
circulated](http://www.bbc.co.uk/mundo/ultimas_noticias/2013/04/130407_ultnot_valor_por_tamaulipas_jgc.shtml)
in the state of Tamaulipas (presumably by a drug cartel) offering a reward of
nearly US$50,000 for any information that would help identify the
administrator.

**Internet Governance**

The [Internet Corporation for Assigned Names and Numbers
(ICANN)](http://www.icann.org/) held its 46th meeting in Beijing last week.
ICANN is the entity responsible for allocating and setting standards for the
Internet's domain name system and what are known as “top-level” domain names
(.com, .net, etc.) for websites. [ICANN's president
announced](http://blogs.wsj.com/chinarealtime/2013/04/10/coming-soon-a-truly-
chinese-internet/) that it will introduce Chinese character options for top-
level domains later this year.

Mali [announced plans to
give](http://www.guardian.co.uk/world/2013/apr/08/mali-first-african-country-
free-domain) national domain (.ml) to users for free starting in July. Despite
low Internet penetration in the country, the policy aims to bring in outside
investment and support for Malian businesses. A representative from Mali's
Information and Communication Technology Agency explained that the plan was
based on the .tk domain model of Tokelau, which has become one of the most
popular in the world. Officials hope that the domain will be particularly
attractive to businesses in Malaysia and Manila (Philippines), given the
shared letters in their names.

**Cybersecurity**

[Peruvian lawmakers
announced](http://www2.congreso.gob.pe/Sicr/TraDocEstProc/Expvirt_2011.nsf/263C137EF894C28705256F5C005E00DB/1556B350AAC8DB6805257B490051EC25?OpenDocument)
the resuscitation of an IT crimes bill introduced in 2012. Known among
netizens as #LeyBeingolea (named for its author, Congressman Alberto
Beingolea) the bill raised concern among [civil liberties
advocates](http://arellanojuan.com/ley-de-delitos-informaticos-y-otras-leyes-
tic-a-debate/) who fear the law would infringe on users’ rights to privacy and
free expression online. Congressional web services indicate that the bill will
be discussed in Congress in the near future.

The Intelligence Committee of the US House of Representatives
[approved](http://news.cnet.com/8301-13578_3-57579012-38/privacy-protections-
booted-from-cispa-data-sharing-bill/) language for the [Cyber Intelligence
Sharing and Protection Act
(CISPA)](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cyber_Intelligence_Sharing_and_Protection_Act),
a controversial data-sharing bill aimed at protecting the US from cyber
threats, without including any amendments to limit intelligence agencies’
capacity to collect sensitive user data. [The House of
Representatives](http://www.pcworld.com/article/2034672/us-house-to-vote-on-
cispa-cyberthreat-bill-this-week.html) will vote on the bill as soon as next
week. Last year, members approved the legislation but a veto threat by
President Obama prevented it from advancing to the Senate.

[According to
researchers](http://www.computerworld.com/s/article/9238329/Wireless_IP_cameras_open_to_hijacking_over_the_Internet_researchers_say?taxonomyId=17&pageNumber=1)
at the [Hack in the Box ](http://www.hitb.org/)security conference, Wireless
IP cameras from Foscam and other vendors have security weaknesses that could
allow hackers to attack and access them remotely.

**Netizen Activism**

Pakistani digital rights NGO [Bytes for All (B4A)](http://www.bytesforall.pk/)
has [begun legal proceedings](http://content.bytesforall.pk/node/96) against
the Federation of Pakistan seeking to challenge “rampant censorship,
surveillance and Internet filtering in the country.” B4A is working in
collaboration with the international media law advocacy network, [Media Legal
Defence Initiative.](http://www.mediadefence.org/)

Canada’s [SecDev Foundation](http://www.secdev.com/) [has launched
](https://advocacy.globalvoicesonline.org/2013/04/09/secdev-foundation-to-
monitor-syrias-digital-security/)the [Syria Digital Security
Monitor](http://syriamonitor.layer8.org/) to visualize “reports of disruption
to critical infrastructure in Syria including Internet, telecommunication,
electricity and water.” The project relies on crowdsourced data derived from
reports by Syrians as well as monitoring through Syrian social media.

**Cool Things**

Afrinnovator discusses the [ramifications that pan-African trade and
business](http://afrinnovator.com/blog/2013/04/01/bitcoin-crypto-currency-and-
the-opportunity-for-a-truly-pan-africa-money-
revolution/?utm_source=rss&utm_medium=rss&utm_campaign=bitcoin-crypto-
currency-and-the-opportunity-for-a-truly-pan-africa-money-revolution) could
face if Bitcoin were to be adopted as a continentally-accepted currency.

**Publications and Studies**

  * [Social Entrepreneurship and the Web in Africa](http://www.internetsansfrontieres.com/Social-Entrepreneurship-And-The-Web-In-Africa_a469.html) – Internet Sans Frontieres

  * [Iranian Internet Infrastructure and Policy Report](http://smallmedia.org.uk/InfoFlowReportMARCH.pdf) – Small Media

[Subscribe to the Netizen Report by
email](http://feedburner.google.com/fb/a/mailverify?uri=NetizenReport)

For upcoming events related to the future of citizen rights in the digital
age, see the[ Global Voices Events
Calendar](https://www.google.com/calendar/embed?src=9o8so5err9tvamd9t0ri9t181o%40group.calendar.google.com&ctz=America/New_York).

