[![Image by M3Li55@ \(CC BY-NC-ND
2.0\)](https://advocacy.globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2013/02/censored_M3Li55@_CC-BY-NC-
ND-375x298.jpg)](http://www.flickr.com/photos/melissa/293921006/)

Image by M3Li55@ (CC BY-NC-ND 2.0)

******Most of this report was researched, written, and edited by[ Weiping
Li](https://advocacy.globalvoicesonline.org/author/weiping-li/),[ Renata
Avila](https://globalvoicesonline.org/author/renata-avila/), [Alex
Laverty](https://advocacy.globalvoicesonline.org/author/alexlaverty/), and[
Sarah Myers](https://advocacy.globalvoicesonline.org/author/sarahbmyers/).**

This week, netizens around the globe have seen an increase in censorship due
to court orders and government actions: an Egyptian court[issued a
verdict](https://advocacy.globalvoicesonline.org/2013/02/13/egypt-court-
orders-youtube-ban/) that would impose a month-long ban on YouTube for the
website’s refusal to take down the anti-Islam film “[the Innocence of
Muslims](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Innocence_of_Muslims).” In September of
2012, the controversial film appeared on YouTube with dubbing in Arabic,
causing public outrage and prompting the governments of several countries
including Pakistan, Bangladesh, Sudan and Afghanistan to request YouTube to
remove the video from its site, but to no avail. Experts in Egypt expect the
decision will be appealed.

The Russian government has shut down[ nearly 600
websites](http://rapsinews.com/news/20130129/266222016.html) that host
suicide-related content, claiming that the sites violate the law “[On
Protecting Children from Information Harmful to Their Health and
Development,](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Federal_law_of_Russian_Federation_no._139-FZ_of_2012-07-28)”
which has been effective since September 2012. Just this year, under the same
law, Russian regulators have ordered ISPs and web hosting services to block
access to[ over 90 sites](http://netprophet.tol.org/2013/02/07/russia-
shutters-more-than-90-sites-over-child-pornography/) that allegedly contain
child pornography. According to the law, the government can block the website
without a court order if the site's content includes or relates to child
pornography.

Global Voices Advocacy contributor [Besti Zibilova
reported](https://advocacy.globalvoicesonline.org/2013/02/07/imgur-com-
blocked-in-azerbaijan/) that the Azerbaijani government has blocked US-based
popular image-sharing website [Imgur.com](http://imgur.com/). Some have
speculated the blocking may be in response to [sensitive government
documents](http://www.cyberwarnews.info/2013/01/19/1-7gb-documents-leaked-
from-special-state-protection-service-of-azerbaijan/) that were recently
leaked by Anonymous and re-posted on Imgur. In[
Pakistan](http://www.buzzfeed.com/jwherrman/buzzfeed-blocked-in-pakistan),
netizens reported that social news website
[Buzzfeed](http://www.buzzfeed.com/) and the website of Canadian newspaper
[The Toronto Sun](http://www.torontosun.com/) have been partially blocked by
the country’s firewall system.  
******  
Thuggery  
**A Palestinian court has found [Anas
Awwad](http://www.globalnews.ca/world/palestinian+sentenced+to+a+year+in+jail+for+cursing+president+mahmoud+abbas+on+facebook/6442804411/story.html)
guilty of “cursing the President” on Facebook and sentenced him to one year in
prison. Awwad’s father said his son left a comment that read, “The new striker
in Real Madrid” beneath a photo of Palestinian president Mahmoud Abbas kicking
a soccer ball during a visit to Spain in 2011. Awwad's attorney plans to
appeal the decision.

Police authorities in China have
[detained](http://www.bbc.co.uk/zhongwen/simp/china/2013/02/130209_china_weibo_xi_fans.shtml)
[zh] a Chinese weibo user from Sichuan province for criticizing Chinese
Communist Party leader Xi Jinping’s Sina weibo “[fan
club](http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/world-asia-china-21363886)”. According to
police documents, the user was charged with “inciting subversion of state
power.”

[Sanjay Chowdhary](http://m.timesofindia.com/india/Man-held-for-Facebook-
posts-targeting-PM-Sibal-and-Mulayam/articleshow/18346332.cms), a chairman of
a public school in Agra, India has been arrested by the police for “communal
and inflammatory” posts lampooning political figures including [Indian Prime
Minister Manmohan Singh](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Manmohan_Singh) on
Facebook. Upon his arrest, Chowdhary's laptop, sim card, and data card were
impounded by officials.

Vietnamese blogger [Le Anh Hung](https://www.cpj.org/2013/02/vietnamese-
blogger-released-from-psychiatric-insti.php) was released on February 5 after
being detained in a mental health institution by security officials for his
online writings criticizing the government.  
******  
Surveillance  
**A report issued by the [UK parliamentary Intelligence and Security
Committee](https://b1cba9b3-a-5e6631fd-s-
sites.googlegroups.com/a/independent.gov.uk/isc/files/20130205_ISC_CD_Report.pdf?attachauth=ANoY7cr5OUyzFJ37a6QCmGKgZqTP2NmXN5B8Y8ud75G9GBV-
VIz_KGFVoQwNHOCGJ43c_9QZl-
LHBRiE3MI4hmoUx6Y0M0fk5uzNKEYXboyl1c0RLBoKxV0lAFP2-XxBZkjIrbZN1oLUlJpfcjcqUtPBdIHgzGpDgdatDmEYjQjYmHdjd0IGyC0ZDteXmI2KfWmi0WpzDDqTadjuGVA26Uukcblj54pzGELL21k5D-NKtrKYlZr28xk%3D&attredirects=0)
[suggested](http://www.zdnet.com/u-k-spy-agencies-plan-to-install-web-
snooping-black-boxes-7000010833/) that to fight terrorism and other serious
crime, the UK government should install surveillance equipment which uses
[“deep packet
inspection”](http://www.pcworld.com/article/249137/what_is_deep_packet_inspection_.html)
technology on mobile and Internet networks to monitor British citizens’ online
activities. This technology would allow officials to track the domain names of
the websites citizens visit, along with “third-party” content content
traveling over the networks of Internet and telecommunications service
providers.

Uganda’s activists have
[asked](http://allafrica.com/stories/201302081451.html?aa_source=nwsltr-ict-
en) the government to suspend its [SIM card registration
requirement](http://www.wired.co.uk/news/archive/2012-01/05/uganda-forces-
citizens-to-register-sims), launched last March for crime-tracking purposes,
arguing that the government must first pass a law that will protect the
personal data of users that is gathered and stored in the registration
process.  
******  
Privacy  
**A [new Microsoft media advertising
campaign,](http://bits.blogs.nytimes.com/2013/02/06/microsoft-attacks-google-
on-gmail-privacy/) set to kick off on Thursday, attacks competitor Google for
its practices concerning user data. Campaign messaging suggests that Google is
far less respectful of user privacy than Microsoft and criticizes Google for
monetizing its popular email service with ads that rely on keywords pulled
from users’ emails.

Raytheon Company, a US-based defense contractor, has developed [software that
can track people’s
movements](http://www.guardian.co.uk/world/2013/feb/10/software-tracks-social-
media-defence) and purportedly can predict future behavior by mining social
media. Raytheon has shared its research with the United States government, but
has yet to sell the software to any buyers.  
******  
National Policy  
**In the Philippines, the Supreme Court[
ruled](http://www.gmanetwork.com/news/story/293478/news/nation/supreme-court-
extends-tro-on-cybercrime-law) on February 5 to indefinitely suspend the
controversial [Cybercrime Prevention Act of 2012,
](https://advocacy.globalvoicesonline.org/2012/10/04/netizenreport-
cybercrime/)which has been criticized for limiting free expression online and
criminalizing anonymous and pseudonymous expression on the Internet.
Meanwhile, Filipino netizens have
[collaborated](https://advocacy.globalvoicesonline.org/2012/12/12/netizenreport-
magna-carta/) in drafting a proposed law called “[the Magna Carta for
Philippine Internet Freedom
(MCPIF)](http://www.senate.gov.ph/press_release/2012/1130_santiago1.asp)” to
replace the suspended Cybercrime Act. Philippine Senator Miriam Defensor-
Santiago has [brought the
MCPIF](http://www.senate.gov.ph/press_release/2012/1130_santiago1.asp) before
Congress.

The [Cyber Intelligence Sharing and Protection Act
(CISPA),](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cyber_Intelligence_Sharing_and_Protection_Act)
widely criticized by civil liberties advocates when it was introduced last
spring, will soon be re-introduced in the US House of Representatives. The
bill, which some advocates now have dubbed [“Zombie
CISPA”,](http://www.theregister.co.uk/2013/02/11/cispa_law_reintroduced/)
encourages cyber-threat information sharing between government and industry.

**Copyright**  
In an effort to combat piracy, the Japanese government has plans to place
[faux files into peer-to-peer filesharing
sites](http://www.techdirt.com/articles/20130204/16045221880/japanese-
government-to-start-seeding-p2p-networks-with-faux-files-containing-copyright-
warnings.shtml) in order to ‘educate’ users about intellectual property laws
in Japan. The faux file, disguised as copyright-protected material available
for download, will contain a message telling the user that downloading such
files constitutes a violation of copyright law.

The [EU Commission](https://www.techdirt.com/articles/20130204/12241621879/eu-
commission-wants-more-copyright-licensing-not-creative-commons-fair-
use.shtml?utm_term=%23oa&utm_source=twitterfeed&utm_medium=twitter) is
proceeding with the “Licenses for Europe” campaign, with the goal of
“[enabl[ing] quality content and new opportunities for all Europeans in the
digital era.](http://www.futureofcopyright.com/home/blog-
post/2013/02/05/licenses-for-europe-a-step-forward-for-european-content-
distribution.html)” French net rights advocacy group [La Quadrature du
Net](http://www.laquadrature.net/en/the-eu-commissions-outrageous-attempt-to-
avoid-copyright-reform) has criticized the process for being biased in favor
of copyright holders’ interests. Thus far, [fair
use](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fair_use)-like policies and [Creative
Commons](creativecommons.org/) licensing have not been part of the discussion.

**Sovereigns of Cyberspace**  
The mobile phone text and voice messaging service WeChat which is widely
popular in China has started to
[enforce](http://www.marbridgeconsulting.com/marbridgedaily/2013-02-06/article/63281/wechat_enforces_public_account_real_name_verification)
real-name verification and require those who use “public accounts” (such as
companies’ and celebrities’ accounts) to submit national ID numbers,
addresses, and even pictures of identification cards for verification.

**Cybersecurity**  
Under the leadership of EU Digital Agenda Commissioner [Neelie
Kroes](http://ec.europa.eu/commission_2010-2014/kroes/index_en.htm), the EU
Commission plans to [propose](http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/technology-21366366) a
set of new cybercrime reporting rules. The rules would require member nations
to establish Computer Emergency Response Teams and to designate a government
agency to which businesses would be asked to report when cybersecurity
breaches occur.

A group of journalists reporting on Myanmar have
[received](http://elevenmyanmar.com/national/2403-journalists-targeted-for-
state-sponsored-gmail-hackings) warnings from Google that their email accounts
have become the targets of “state-sponsored” cyberattacks, though Google did
not identify the source of attacks. Some Myanmar media outlets’ websites and
Facebook pages also experienced hacking since January.  
******  
Publications and Studies  
**

  * Bytes for all: [Freedom of Expression and Net Freedom in the Manifestos of Political Parties in Pakistan](http://content.bytesforall.pk/node/92)
  * Cybersecurity Strategy of the European Union: [An Open, Safe and Secure Cyberspace](http://r20.rs6.net/tn.jsp?e=0014l_RXaHg2RB5wYOeFXDbx_J03z2ntDGymio57AWazUpf49J-3crG0CuamwgzBaJ1VT3rFE7rkhzxOIIIND9BnJr74bwQMuT4EuAZK4Sw5atVQGEbQycqy3rq2S-eWbZoXRpPLWAh2BMxrKLIPL7ygAmnukZXeTp2TecDO_B3gWqXXiYnnlsSM7iYtwSduarc6cWqf-GkeRk=)
  * Center for a New American Security: [The Internet Yalta](http://www.cnas.org/theinternetyalta)

**  
[Subscribe to the Netizen Report by
email](http://feedburner.google.com/fb/a/mailverify?uri=NetizenReport)**

For upcoming events related to the future of citizen rights in the digital
age, see the[ Global Voices Events
Calendar](https://www.google.com/calendar/embed?src=9o8so5err9tvamd9t0ri9t181o%40group.calendar.google.com&ctz=America/New_York).

