[![](https://advocacy.globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2012/11/China.jpg)](http://www.flickr.com/photos/methodshop/2630953749/sizes/s/in/photostream/)

Image via Flickr user methodshop.com (CC BY-SA 2.0)

This report was researched, written, and edited by[ Weiping
Li](https://advocacy.globalvoicesonline.org/author/weiping-li/),[ Renata
Avila](https://globalvoicesonline.org/author/renata-avila/), [Chan Myae
Khine](https://globalvoicesonline.org/author/mydaydream/), [Hisham
Almiraat](https://globalvoicesonline.org/author/hisham/), [ Sarah
Myers](https://advocacy.globalvoicesonline.org/author/sarahbmyers/), and
[Rebecca MacKinnon](https://advocacy.globalvoicesonline.org/author/rebecca-
mackinnon/).

As China's new generation of leaders were officially presented to the world
this week at the Chinese Communist Party's 18th National Congress, Chinese
netizens experienced severe Internet interruptions. As the longtime Beijing-
based blogger and businessman Bill Bishop[
described](http://dealbook.nytimes.com/2012/11/12/reform-and-the-internet-
with-chinese-characteristics/) it, “these have been the most draconian few
days of Internet restrictions I have experienced.”

Several weeks before the Congress, netizens began to
[report](http://blogs.wsj.com/chinarealtime/2012/11/07/internet-disruptions-
increase-as-china-leadership-transition-nears/?mod=WSJBlog) frequent
disruptions when accessing Google services, foreign websites and virtual
private networks (VPNs) – important tools for Internet users to circumvent the
“Great Firewall.” Interruptions to Internet access then cranked into high gear
on November 9, one day after the start of the Congress, when Google services
were reported to be fully blocked in China, and their domain name systems were
deliberately redirected to unknown IP addresses in Korea. Please see
[Greatfire.org](https://en.greatfire.org/blog/2012/nov/googlecom-blocked-
china) for more detailed reports and analysis.

Inside the Great Firewall, censors have been busy deleting online political
discussions. According to[ Reporters without Borders](http://en.rsf.org/chine-
censorship-and-freedom-of-08-11-2012,43649.html), the word “the 18th Party
Congress” (pronounced in Chinese “Shi-Ba-Da”) and similar sounding phrases
used by netizens to avoid censorship are filtered; dissidents like [Hu
Jia](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2012/11/15/chinese-dissident-hu-jia-
complained-about-18th-party-congress/) have had their microblog accounts
suspended; activist [Guo
Feixiong](http://www.guardian.co.uk/world/2011/sep/14/freed-china-dissident-
tortured) was [detained](http://www.chinaaid.org/2012/09/boxun-interview-with-
dissenter-guo.html) on November 9th, and blogger Chen Zuoliang was also
[detained](http://www.libertyvoice.net/2012-11/china-censorship-and-freedom-
of-information-during-the-18th-congress-of-the-chinese-communist-party/) for
interrogation on the same day. ********

**Censorship**

Meanwhile, Chinese websites have seen increased levels of self-censorship
during the meeting. Some Internet forums have been temporarily suspended. For
example, when visiting one of the forums, visitors see nothing but [two
lines](http://www.5d6d.net/) [zh] reading: “To welcome the 18th Party
Congress, this forum has closed temporarily. We happily welcome the Congress!
Wish the Congress all the success!”

In early November, the popular Chinese microblog service Sina Weibo also
[changed ](http://blockedonweibo.tumblr.com/post/34989212185/all-sensitive-
terms-on-sina-weibo-now-show-0-results)the way it displays search results
which are blocked from keyword censorship: instead of telling users that the
keywords searched are forbidden by laws and regulations, the webpage only
stated that “no results are found for the keywords” without explaining that
the keywords are actually banned. Then on November 9th Sina weibo re-instated
its censorship notice, as [documented](http://blog.feichangdao.com/2012/11/in-
week-before-party-congress-sina.html) by the blog Fei Chang Dao.

Elsewhere in the world: on November 7, the Egyptian Public Prosecutor issued
official letters to the Minister of Communications and Information Technology,
the head of the NTRA (National Telecom Regulatory Authority) and the Minister
of the Interior, asking them to enforce a court decision made in 2009 which
ordered a ban on porn sites in Egypt. Global Voices Advocacy’s [Rayna
St](https://advocacy.globalvoicesonline.org/2012/11/08/egypt-to-block-porn-
sites-again/) and the [MENA Netizen
Report](https://advocacy.globalvoicesonline.org/2012/11/14/mena-netizen-
report-porn-edition/) detail the history of the porn site ban in Egypt and
related controversies.

The Australian government has [given up](http://www.zdnet.com/au/aust-govt-
dumps-broad-mandatory-filter-for-interpol-block-7000007080/) its mandatory
Internet filtering legislation which required Internet Services Providers
(ISPs) to block objectionable materials that fit into the “[Refused
Classification](http://www.zdnet.com/refused-classification-means-what-
exactly-1339302116/)”. Instead, the ISPs will be asked to filter specific
child abuse websites that are on the Interpol’s [“Worst
of”-list](http://www.interpol.int/Crime-areas/Crimes-against-children/Access-
blocking).

A team under the European Commission has been working on the project
“[European Capability for Situational
Awareness](http://www.slate.com/blogs/future_tense/2012/11/06/european_capability_for_situation_awareness_program_to_monitor_internet.html)”
which will monitor and map out global online censorship, surveillance and
other issues related to Internet freedom in near to real time. **** ****

**Thuggery**

Iranian blogger [Sattar Beheshti](http://www.amnesty.org/en/news/iran-must-
immediately-investigate-blogger-s-death-custody-2012-11-08) who had criticized
the Iranian government on his website was taken from his home by men reported
to be the Iranian cyber police in late October. On November 6, his family was
told to collect his body from a detention facility. His family and friends
suspect that Beheshti was tortured to death. Now the Iranian parliament has
[promised](http://www.voanews.com/content/beheshti_parliament_investigation_blogger_death/1543764.html)
to investigate the blogger’s death, and a parliament member has called for
officials to go after corrupt officials rather than bloggers and the media.

The questionable Indian law –[Section 66A of India's Information Technology
[IT]
Act](http://articles.timesofindia.indiatimes.com/2012-11-09/madurai/35015337_1_public-
interest-litigation-pil-madurai-bench), which has sweeping power to put people
in prison for sending messages causing “annoyance or inconvenience”, has once
again led to the arrest of an Indian anti-corruption campaign volunteer who
[tweeted](http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/world-asia-india-20202275) about a
politician’s wealth. ********

**Privacy**

Skype [handed over](http://www.nu.nl/internet/2950158/skype-hands-16-year-
olds-personal-information-to-it-company.html) the personal information of a
16-year-old to an IT firm without any court order over suspicions the
individual was involved in an attack on online payment service providers
including Paypal by hacker group Anonymous, known as “Operation Payback”. The
company mentioned they are in the midst of reviewing how the personal
information came into the hands of a private firm.

Microsoft filed a [new patent](http://dailycaller.com/2012/11/08/microsoft-
can-see-you-naked-and-you-set-up-the-camera/) known as “[Content Distribution
by Viewing User](http://appft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-
Parser?Sect1=PTO1&Sect2=HITOFF&d=PG01&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsrchnum.html&r=1&f=G&l=50&s1=%2220120278904%22.PGNR.&OS=DN/20120278904&RS=DN/20120278904),”
which would turn on Microsoft’s Kinect technology remotely to monitor how many
users are accessing licensed content via Microsoft’s system, cutting the
content if the number of users exceeds the terms of the license. **** ****

**National Policy**

According to the latest [Transparency
Report](http://googleblog.blogspot.com/2012/11/transparency-report-government-
requests.html) released by Google, requests by governments all over the world
for user information have been steadily increasing since Google launched the
report in early 2010.

The US government has announced
[sanctions](http://www.state.gov/r/pa/prs/ps/2012/11/200338.htm) against four
Iranian individuals and five Iranian entities for their involvement in media
and Internet censorship. According to AFP’s
[report](http://www.google.com/hostednews/afp/article/ALeqM5h8RwFP7AwmVA4jb7V5mMzToYHmLA?docId=CNG.a3912b20ece0da21c2c77361f7e28116.2b1),
among those who are sanctioned, the Communications Minister Reza Taghipour has
been accused of restricting Internet access; two software companies, AmnAfzar
Gostar-e Sharif and PeykAsa, and their founder Rasool Jalili, have been blamed
for monitoring and blocking Internet traffic.

The Electronic Frontier Foundation is
[concerned](https://www.eff.org/deeplinks/2012/11/brazilian-internet-bill-
threatens-freedom-expression) that in Brazil, last minute changes to the Marco
Civil, an Internet bill of rights, actually threaten Internet users’ freedom
of expression because new wording leaves “users and Internet service providers
in an ocean of legal uncertainty.”

**Copyright**

[Last minute changes](https://www.eff.org/deeplinks/2012/11/brazilian-
internet-bill-threatens-freedom-expression#footnote1_ttc8jid) to Brazil's
Internet Bill of Rights (Marco Civil), legislation that is expected to defend
Internet freedom, weaken protections for ISPs against being vulnerable for
infringing content by third parties in cases of copyright and neighborhood
rights. The vote on the legislation has been postponed from November 7 to
November 13.

Kim Dotcom, the boss of the now closed file-sharing site[
MegaUpload](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Megaupload), planned to relaunch the
website by having its server hosted in Gabon. However, the Communication
Minister of Gabon soon [ordered](http://phys.org/news/2012-11-gabon-
megaupload-site.html) suspending the website [www.me.ga](http://www.me.ga/) in
order to “protect intellectual property rights” and “fight cyber crime
effectively”. Afterward Kim Dotcom
[announced](http://www.techspot.com/news/50776-megaupload-now-set-to-relaunch-
as-megaconz.html) via Twitter that the MegaUpload website will find its new
home in New Zealand at mega.co.nz. ********

**Sovereigns of Cyberspace**

An alternative to Google and Yahoo’s search engine named
“[DuckDuckGo](http://duckduckgo.com/)” has been gaining popularity among
Internet users. By [branding itself
](http://www.washingtonpost.com/business/ducking-google-in-search-
engines/2012/11/09/6cf3af10-2842-11e2-bab2-eda299503684_story_2.html)as a
”pure search engine”, DuckDuckGo claims it brings truly relevant information
within users’ first few search results and does not send user data to third
parties.

[The Uprising of Women in the Arab
World](https://www.facebook.com/intifadat.almar2a), a group supporting women’s
rights in the Middle East, has
[accused](http://www.globalpost.com/dispatch/news/regions/middle-
east/121108/activists-why-facebook-censoring-photo) Facebook of censoring a
photo on the group’s Facebook page, and threatening to deactivate
administrators’ Facebook accounts. The image in question shows a woman named
Dana Bakdounes holding a sign reading “I am with the uprising of women in the
Arab world because for 20 years I wasn’t allowed to feel the wind in my hair
and on my body.” Facebook responded saying that the photograph was initially
removed in error, and was later reinstated; subsequently an item was removed
for violating community standards. **** ****

**Internet Governance**

In an [opinion piece](http://www.wired.com/opinion/2012/11/head-of-itu-un-
should-internet-regulation-effort/) in Wired, International Telecommunication
Union (ITU) Secretary General Hamadoun Toure outlines some of the positive
outcomes UN regulation of the Internet could bring, including increased
connectivity, Internet security, and infrastructure for those with
disabilities. Less positively, [TechDirt
describes](http://www.techdirt.com/articles/20121107/21233320970/itu-boss-
explains-why-he-wants-un-to-start-regulating-internet.shtml) the way
cybersecurity has been used as a banner to legitimize censorship by the ITU.

ICANN's new CEO Fahdi Chehade has written an [open letter
](http://www.icann.org/en/news/correspondence/chehade-to-icann-
community-05nov12-en)to the ICANN community pledging to improve upon and
deepen global support for his organization's multi-stakeholder model by doing
a better job of engaging with stakeholders around the world. After beefing up
engagement with Africa his organization which coordinate's the Internet's
domain name system will soon be holding stakeholder consultations in Latin
America and the Caribbean, as well as India and Turkey.

**Cybersecurity**

Last week Twitter emailed users whose accounts were suspected of having been
compromised, asking them to [to reset their
passwords](http://abcnews.go.com/blogs/technology/2012/11/twitter-asks-users-
to-reset-passwords-citing-hacking-issues/). However after large numbers of
users, including some prominent [China-based Twitter
users](http://thenextweb.com/asia/2012/11/08/china-watchers-subjected-to-
twitter-account-hacking-attempts-as-transfer-of-political-power-begins/),
jumped to conclusions about politically motivated attacks, Twitter
[admitted](http://www.telegraph.co.uk/technology/twitter/9665067/Twitter-
apologises-over-false-hacking-warnings.html) that they had “reset passwords of
a large number of accounts, beyond those that they believed to have been
compromised”.

Chevron acknowledged that its IT network was
[infected](http://blogs.wsj.com/cio/2012/11/08/stuxnet-infected-chevrons-it-
network/) by the “Stuxnet” computer virus in July 2010, shortly after the
virus escaped its target, Iranian nuclear enrichment facilities in Natanz.
Chevron is the first US company to acknowledge infection by Stuxnet, though
most security experts believe many more cases have gone unreported.

Hacker groups 0-Day and Pyknic [allegedly
compromised](http://www.zdnet.com/au/pizza-hut-hacked-customer-info-lost-
credit-card-details-safe-7000007016/) Pizza Hut’s Australian website and
claimed to have obtained credit card information from 240,000 customers. Pizza
Hut admitted that the website was compromised but
[denied](http://afr.com/p/technology/pizza_hut_denies_hacker_claims_f9l481dLfoIgw1zy87m4FN)
credit card details were stolen.

European Commission Vice President Neelie Kroes claims that computers
belonging to her advisers were[ hacked](http://phys.org/news/2012-11-eu-
hacked-web-conference.html#nwlt) for surveillance purposes by an unknown party
during the [Internet Governance Forum](http://www.intgovforum.org/cms/). Kroes
criticized the Azerbaijan government for conducting surveillance of activists
during the meeting, which was held last week in the country’s capital Baku.

According to a [draft](http://news.cnet.com/8301-1023_3-57545598-93/u.s-panel-
labels-china-largest-cyberspace-threat-report-says/) report produced by the
[U.S.- China Economic and Security Review Commission](http://www.uscc.gov/),
there are growing signs of cyber-espionage from Chinese hackers who breach US
military and defense contractors’ computer systems to collect information.
**** ****

**Netizen Activism**

The Robert Kennedy Center for Justice and Human Rights, based in a former
prison in Florence, Italy, [will provide
scholarships](http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/business-20085559) to bloggers and
digital activists. The human rights campaigners will be trained to use
practical tactics to maintain their anonymity during involvement in human
rights campaigns.

Computer experts in Miami are working to [expand the flow of uncensored
information](http://www.elnuevoherald.com/2012/11/11/1341245/expertos-en-
miami-rompen-censura.html) [es] to Cuba by sending USB drives, CDs and SIM
cards containing a package of websites, blogs and online news portals
consistently blocked on the island. ****

**Publications and Studies  
**

  * Open Society Foundation: [Mapping Digital Media: Peru](http://www.opensocietyfoundations.org/reports/mapping-digital-media-peru)
  * Manisha Aryal: [SpeakSafe: Media Workers’ Toolkit for Safer Online and Mobile Practices](http://internews.org/research-publications/speaksafe-media-workers-toolkit-safer-online-and-mobile-practices)
  * Twiplomacy.com: [Country Promotion ](http://twiplomacy.com/country-promotion/)(which governments are using Twitter and how)

**[Subscribe to the Netizen Report by
email](http://feedburner.google.com/fb/a/mailverify?uri=NetizenReport)**

For upcoming events related to the future of citizen rights in the digital
age, see the[ Global Voices Events
Calendar](https://www.google.com/calendar/embed?src=9o8so5err9tvamd9t0ri9t181o%40group.calendar.google.com&ctz=America/New_York).

