[![](https://advocacy.globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2012/11/IGF.jpeg)](http://www.flickr.com/photos/internetsociety/8163605546/lightbox/)

Image via Flickr User InternetSociety. CC BY-NC-SA 2.0

**This report was researched, written, and edited by[Hisham
Almiraat](https://globalvoicesonline.org/author/hisham/), [Chan Myae
Khine](https://globalvoicesonline.org/author/mydaydream/), [Renata
Avila](https://globalvoicesonline.org/author/renata-avila/), [Alex
Laverty](https://advocacy.globalvoicesonline.org/author/alexlaverty/),
[Weiping Li](https://advocacy.globalvoicesonline.org/author/weiping-li/),
[Sarah Myers](https://advocacy.globalvoicesonline.org/author/sarahbmyers/),
and [Rebecca
MacKinnon](https://advocacy.globalvoicesonline.org/author/rebecca-
mackinnon/).**

The [7th Internet Governance
Forum](http://igf2012.com/?mod=default&cid=85&lang=en) (IGF) is being held
this week in Baku, the capital of Azerbaijan. From November 6 – 9, the annual
UN-sponsored event is bringing together “all the stakeholders” under the same
roof to discuss major Internet governance issues ranging from policing, to
[access](http://wsms1.intgovforum.org/content/no157-access-internet-human-
right), to content management, to freedom of expression online.

The event comes at an important juncture, weeks before the [World Conference
on International
Telecommunications](http://www.itu.int/en/wcit-12/Pages/default.aspx) (WCIT),
convened by the [International Telecommunications
Union](http://www.itu.int/en/Pages/default.aspx) (ITU), a UN sub-agency,
starts in Dubai. Online free speech advocates have [voiced concern
](http://igcaucus.org:9001/p/wcit_statement)over the lack of transparency of
the decision-making process leading to the WCIT, which, [they
say](http://www.indexoncensorship.org/2012/11/internet-governance-forum/),
could profoundly alter the structure of the Internet and erode human rights
online. For more about the issues at stake [read this
post](https://advocacy.globalvoicesonline.org/2012/11/07/protecting-the-open-
web-net-activists-unite/) by our team member [Ellery
Biddle](https://advocacy.globalvoicesonline.org/author/ellery-roberts-
biddle/).

The choice of Azerbaijan as host country for the meeting was also
controversial. The former Soviet republic is hardly known for its respect of
human rights and many rights organizations have [expressed
concern](http://www.hrw.org/news/2012/11/02/azerbaijan-concerns-regarding-
freedom-media-and-freedom-expression) about holding the event in a country
known for its “poor and worsening record on freedom of expression, online and
offline.” [Emin Milli](https://threatened.globalvoicesonline.org/blogger/emin-
milli), an Azerbaijani blogger and activist who was [arrested in
2009](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2009/07/08/azerbaijan-youth-activists-
beaten-and-detained/) and imprisoned for more than a year for his dissidence
online, [posted an open
letter](https://advocacy.globalvoicesonline.org/2012/11/06/azerbaijan-open-
letter-to-president-aliyev-ahead-of-international-governance-forum-in-baku/)
to President Aliyev on the opening day of the conference, challenging the
authorities’ claims that the Internet was free in his country. For further
updates on the outcome of the IGF, stay tuned for more reports here on Global
Voices Advocacy and in next week's Netizen Report.

******Privacy**

At the 34th Annual Data Protection and Privacy Commissioners’ Conference in
Punta del Este, Uruguay, the chairman of the Dutch Data Protection Authority
argued that the European Union's draft Data Protection Regulation should be
strengthened to clarify the concept of “explicit consent” before collection of
personal information. Global Voices’ own [Renata
Avila](https://globalvoicesonline.org/author/renata-avila/) also argued there
is a special need for data protection regulations in Guatemala, where security
measures such as surveillance cameras are increasing in response to violence.
For a further round-up of the conference discussion, see the Electronic
Frontier Foundation’s [website](https://www.eff.org/deeplinks/2012/10/privacy-
takes-center-stage-uruguay).

Facebook [integrated their privacy
policy](http://www.redorbit.com/news/technology/1112725162/facebook-
strengthens-privacy-policy-education-for-new-users/) into the registration
tutorial for new users this week. According to analysts, this was done in an
effort to encourage users to share more by understanding how Facebook would
use their data. ****

**Censorship**

Russia’s Telecom Minister Nikolai Nikiforov asserted that the Russian
government is not seeking to censor the Internet, in reference to a [new
law](http://english.ruvr.ru/2012_10_29/Surely-no-censorship-for-Internet-in-
Russia-Russia-s-Telecom-Minister/) which aims to protect children from harmful
websites by allowing authorities in Russia to be able to take down certain
websites that post child-unfriendly content. Human Rights advocates and other
websites including the Russian version of Wikipedia have [expressed
concerns](http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/technology-20096274) that the new law,
which took effect November 1, could increase online censorship in Russia.

In a review of Pakistan’s human rights standing by the UN Human Rights
Council, the Netherlands
[recommended](http://tribune.com.pk/story/460098/pakistans-human-rights-
review-internet-censorship-comes-under-scrutiny/) Pakistan remove restrictions
on Internet access. Pakistan will respond to the recommendations by March 2013
at the 22nd session of the Council.

Singapore’s TODAY newspaper discussed [censorship of certain topics and
phrases](http://www.todayonline.com/World/China/EDC121101-0000087/Weibo-poses-
danger,-opportunity-for-Chinas-new-leaders) by the Chinese microblogging
network, Weibo, as posing both a danger and an opportunity for China’s new
leaders. (China is undergoing a leadership transition this week.) The article
discusses the way Chinese censors allow discussion to occur when regional
level officials are involved, but are quick to clamp down microblogs that
mention national figures. ****

**Thuggery**

An Internet cafe worker, Cao Haibao, who set up a[ web chat group that
discussed social issues has been jailed](http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/world-asia-
china-20172104) in the run up to China’s leadership transition. Cao was
sentenced to seven years in jail for “subversion of state power” in a secret
hearing in the southwestern city of Kunming. [Global
Voices](https://advocacy.globalvoicesonline.org/2012/11/05/china-cyber-cafe-
owner-sentenced-to-8-years-for-organizing-a-chat-group/) added its own
coverage to the story.

A Bahraini Twitter user was sentenced to 6 months for [insulting the country’s
king](https://advocacy.globalvoicesonline.org/2012/10/17/four-tweeps-arrested-
in-bahrain/) over the microblogging service.

The censorship of Mexican non-profit video blogger Ruy Salgado, who rose to
attention during the most recent election in Mexico, was [profiled this week
by Americas Quaterly](http://www.americasquarterly.org/censorship-in-Mexico-
the-case-of-Ruy-Salgado). After disappearing from the Internet for 42 days,
Salgaldo, known as “el 5santo,” ceased broadcasting after threats jeopardized
his safety and his family. On his final online broadcast, a Skype call
streamed live onto the Internet, he warned other bloggers to be “very
careful.”

Four [Facebook users were arrested in
Iran](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2012/10/30/iran-four-facebook-users-
arrested/) this week for engaging in ‘propaganda activities against the
regime’.

[Reporters without Borders condemned the action](http://en.rsf.org/bulgarie-
news-website-harassed-for-24-10-2012,43583.html) taken by four banks in
Bulgaria which sought to use a financial law to intimidate the Bulgarian
portal for Wikileaks. The website, Bivol.bg, published a report that alleged
malpractice in the banking industry using their sources to corroborate a
American Embassy cable that mentioned ‘bad apples’ in these banks.

The New York Times Arts Section carries an Associated Press report on [two
Vietnamese musicians who were sentenced to prison
terms](http://artsbeat.blogs.nytimes.com/2012/10/30/vietnam-
sentences-2-musicians-to-prison-terms-on-propaganda-charges/) for their
creation and dissemination of protest songs. One song became a YouTube hit,
but it did not stop the government from continuing their increased repression
of freedom of expression online in recent weeks. **  
****  
National Policy  
**

Cuba has accused the United States of using the US Interests Section at the
Swiss Embassy in Havana to [support government opponents through the provision
of Internet access](http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/world-latin-america-20185565) to
Cuban dissidents. The Americans have countered that they are simply providing
free access and courses on the Internet.

With President Barack Obama re-elected this week for a second term (thanks in
part to his campaign's superior [digital
strategy](http://techpresident.com/news/23104/help-digital-infrastructure-
obama-wins-re-election)), analysts predict that Internet policy challenges
will [include copyright and
privacy](http://news.cnet.com/8301-13578_3-57546170-38/obama-faces-piracy-
privacy-tests-in-his-second-term/).

**Copyright**

Intending to increase transparency, Twitter [will leave a
message](http://www.pcadvisor.co.uk/news/internet/3408979/twitter-leaves-
placeholder-message-for-copyright-violations/) titled “Tweet withheld” for any
content removed due to copyright violations, and removal requests will be sent
to [Chilling Effects](http://www.chillingeffects.org/twitter).

In Germany a new bill known as the [ancillary copyright
bill](http://www.cnbc.com/id/49689511) allowing news agencies to charge Google
and similar web pages for displaying links to their articles in search results
will be discussed by the [Bundestag](http://www.wikipedia.org/wiki/bundestag)
at the end of November. Similar legislation has been proposed in France and
Brazil, as described in the [Netizen
Report](https://advocacy.globalvoicesonline.org/2012/10/25/netizenreport-
malawi-zambia/) on October 25.

**Sovereigns of Cyberspace**

According to [The Brookings Institution](http://www.brookings.edu/blogs/up-
front/posts/2012/11/06-election-communications-west), a Washington D.C. think
tank, social media platforms and mobile devices have become more important
than ever when it comes to winning a presidential election.

Although Twitter can be an important tool during crises, victims of Hurricane
Sandy also learned the hard way that like any un-filtered, unedited source of
raw information it can also be [a source of misleading and inaccurate
facts](http://www.nytimes.com/2012/11/01/technology/on-twitter-sifting-
through-falsehoods-in-critical-times.html?ref=global-home&_r=0).

Last week Facebook was
[accused](http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-2225667/Facebook-censors-
Navy-SEALs-said-Obama-denied-backup-forces-overran-Benghazi-killed-U-S-
Ambassador.html?ito=feeds-newsxml) of censoring U.S. Navy SEALs who said
President Obama denied them backup as forces overran the U.S. consulate in
Benghazi, Libya and killed the U.S. Ambassador. After a[ storm of
criticism](http://www.dailydot.com/politics/facebook-special-operations-
speaks-obama/) Facebook apologized and allowed the content to be posted,
claiming that the content removal was not political but rather an enforcement
of its[ Statement of Rights and
Responsibilities](https://www.facebook.com/legal/terms) which forbids tagging
people without their consent. Herdict.org
[analyzes](http://blogs.law.harvard.edu/herdict/2012/11/07/facebook-content-
deletion-anti-spam-or-censorship/) the challenges for social networking
companies of enforcing anti-spam mechanisms without inflicting collateral
damage on political activists who can often behave like spammers.

Chinese Internet companies Baidu and Qihoo have agreed on [a code of
conduct](http://online.wsj.com/article/SB10001424052970204707104578092510929833992.html?mod=googlenews_wsj)
for fair competition in the wake of a dispute in which Baidu sued Qihoo for
allegedly crawling Baidu's search results.

**Cybersecurity**

Hacker group Anonymous
[threatened](http://www.independent.co.uk/voices/comment/anonymous-hackers-
threaten-to-take-down-facebook-but-in-the-fight-between-anonymous-and-zynga-
everybody-loses-8276971.html) Facebook that they would take the site down and
allow its users to play Zynga's games free to protest Zynga’s announcement
that it will lay off 1,000 of its employees.

According to the threat assessment report by Kaspersky, Russia is [the most
dangerous country in the world for Internet
security](http://www.forbes.com/sites/kenrapoza/2012/11/02/for-internet-
safety-russia-most-dangerous-in-world/) and holds 23.2 percent of world's
malicious web content. It also stands at second in the list of countries with
the highest risk of infection from malware.

Electronic Frontier Foundation (EFF)
[requested](https://www.eff.org/deeplinks/2012/10/privacy-ubuntu-1210-amazon-
ads-and-data-leaks) Ubuntu address some privacy related issues including the
“include online search results” default feature in their latest version of
Ubuntu 12.10. The new search feature returns Amazon-affiliated advertisements
for products as part of search results, and has been criticized for data leaks
because of an insecure search function. ****

**Netizen Activism**

The Electronic Frontier Foundation announced the launch of the [Open Wireless
Movement](https://openwireless.org/) , a j[oint
effort](https://www.eff.org/deeplinks/2012/10/why-we-have-open-wireless-
movement) in collaboration with nine other organizations to let users share
their wireless networks without privacy infringement or sacrificing bandwidth
for “a future with ubiquitous open Internet”.

In a [guest post on
Access](https://www.accessnow.org/blog/2012/10/31/peruvians-balance-public-
debate-on-internet-user-rights), Miguel Morachimo of Hiperderecho.org
discussed the challenges civil society actors are facing in their discussions
on Internet public policy in Peru. He describes the goals of
[Hiperderecho](http://www.hiperderecho.org/delitosinformaticos/) [es], a group
of young professionals studying and facilitating public understanding of
public policy on the Internet in Peru. ****

**Cool Things**

In Bangladesh, the [“Info Ladies”
project](http://www.dailystar.com.lb/Technology/International/2012/Nov-02/193678-internet-
rolls-into-bangladesh-villages-on-a-bike.ashx) carries laptops with Internet
connections to remote villages to help women use Internet devices to access
government services and chat with loved ones.

Facebook is [testing a
service](http://news.cnet.com/8301-1023_3-57544135-93/facebook-tests-free-wi-
fi-hot-spots-in-exchange-for-check-ins/) that provides a free Wi-Fi hot spot
for users who “check-in” at local businesses partnering with Facebook. Users
who do not wish to use Facebook can also access Wi-Fi by obtaining the
password for local businesses.

**Publications and Studies**

  * Kevin Donovan and Aaron Martin: [The Rise of African SIM Registration: Mobility, Identity, Surveillance & Resistance](http://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=2172283)
  * UNESCO: [Global survey on Internet privacy and freedom of expression](http://www.unesco.org/new/internet-privacy-and-foe)
  * Pew Internet & American Life Project: [Social Media and Political Engagement](http://pewinternet.org/Reports/2012/Political-engagement.aspx)

**[Subscribe to the Netizen Report by
email](http://feedburner.google.com/fb/a/mailverify?uri=NetizenReport)**

For upcoming events related to the future of citizen rights in the digital
age, see the[ Global Voices Events
Calendar](https://www.google.com/calendar/embed?src=9o8so5err9tvamd9t0ri9t181o%40group.calendar.google.com&ctz=America/New_York).

