[![](https://advocacy.globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2012/08/Google-
image.jpg)](http://www.flickr.com/photos/halilgokdal/5639500641/sizes/n/in/photostream/)

By Flickr user Halilgokdal (CC BY-NC-SA 2.0)

**Most of this report was researched, written, and edited by[ Tom
Risen](https://advocacy.globalvoicesonline.org/author/tomrisen/),[ James
Losey, Weiping Li](https://advocacy.globalvoicesonline.org/author/weiping-
li/),[ Renata Avila](https://globalvoicesonline.org/author/renata-avila/),
[Rayna St](https://globalvoicesonline.org/author/rayna-st/),[ Sarah
Myers](https://advocacy.globalvoicesonline.org/author/sarahbmyers/), and
[Rebecca MacKinnon](https://advocacy.globalvoicesonline.org/author/rebecca-
mackinnon/).  
**

In our latest Netizen Report we focus on the busy week Google is having as the
world’s biggest search engine seeks to manage concerns from governments,
businesses and users. Google’s decision to punish [copyright
violators](http://www.pcworld.com/article/260762/google_appeases_hollywood_but_rankles_internet_freedom_watchers.html)
by lowering their rankings on the search engine’s algorithm is a reminder of
the how search results have far-reaching effects. The move to decrease the
page rankings of sites that have repeatedly received DMCA “takedown” notices
of copyright infringement is a nod to Hollywood’s concern over [content
piracy](http://searchengineland.com/dmca-requests-now-used-in-googles-ranking-
algorithm-130118), but some technologists argue it will do little to stem
illegal downloads because the links on Google will merely be harder to find.
[Privacy advocates](https://www.eff.org/deeplinks/2012/08/googles-opaque-new-
policy-lets-rightsholders-dictate-search-results) say the move threatens the
reliability of search results.

Another search engine change Google
[announced](http://bits.blogs.nytimes.com/2012/08/08/new-google-tools-to-make-
the-search-engine-more-all-knowing/?ref=technology) is a beta test of a tool
that will include results from Gmail in search requests when a user is logged
in to their account. This announcement is arousing privacy concerns similar to
when Google used its users’ [personal
data](http://www.nytimes.com/2010/02/15/technology/internet/15google.html) in
2010 to create the now-defunct Google Buzz chat network. As a result of the
2010 Google Buzz concerns the United States’ [Federal Trade
Commission](http://www.ftc.gov/opa/2012/08/google.shtm) (FTC) required Google
to undergo [privacy audits
](http://www.washingtonpost.com/business/technology/googles-internet-search-
engine-to-pull-info-from-users-gmail-accounts-in-latest-
expansion/2012/08/08/e7b4a4ac-e184-11e1-89f7-76e23a982d06_story.html)for 20
years. The FTC also announced last week that Google will pay a $22.5 million
[settlement](http://mashable.com/2012/08/09/ftc-google-22-5-million/) for
violating that privacy settlement with the agency by placing behavioral
tracking cookies in Apple’s Safari Web browser. The settlement is the largest
ever filed with the FTC, but it is
[reportedly](http://mashable.com/2012/07/10/google-privacy-charges/) equal to
the amount Google makes in five hours. More government pressure on Google
comes from India, which just launched an [anti-
trust](http://www.zdnet.com/india-antitrust-body-investigating-google-
report-7000002541/) investigation of the company over alleged anti-competitive
practices on Monday. When questioned on the investigation Google replied to
[Reuters](http://www.reuters.com/article/2012/08/13/net-us-google-india-
antitrust-idUSBRE87C0MQ20120813), “We're confident that our products are
compliant with competition law in India.” **** ****

**Sovereigns of Cyberspace**

In more Google news, the company is being sued for
[defamation](https://advocacy.globalvoicesonline.org/2012/08/12/hong-kong-
google-search-engine-sued-for-defamation/) by the chairman of the Hong Kong-
based [Emperor Group](http://www.emperorgroup.com/page.php?p_id=201) of
companies, [Albert Yeung Sau-
shing,](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Albert_Yeung) who claims the search
engine links to defaming articles when his name is entered. Albert Yeung has
presumed links with triad criminal activity, and has been convicted of crimes
in the past, such as a conviction in 1986 for “illegal bookmaking” and in the
1998 for “insider trading,” Global Voices Advocacy
[reports](https://advocacy.globalvoicesonline.org/2012/08/12/hong-kong-google-
search-engine-sued-for-defamation/).

Craigslist, the US-based classified advertisement website, illustrated the
business importance of search engines by briefly laying [copyright claims
](http://arstechnica.com/tech-policy/2012/08/craigslist-reportedly-blocks-
search-engines-to-kill-competitors/)to posts by their users and banning their
inclusion on search engines. Craigslist later
[retracted](https://www.eff.org/deeplinks/2012/08/good-news-craigslist-drops-
exclusive-license-your-posts) the ban.

The beta version of the
[upcoming](http://www.theverge.com/2012/8/6/3223775/apple-youtube-ios6) Apple
iO 6 operating system for iPads and iPhones does not include an app for
Google’s YouTube, prompting
[analysis](http://bits.blogs.nytimes.com/2012/08/06/apple-to-remove-youtube-
app-from-iphone-and-ipad/?ref=technology) of chilled relations between Google
and Apple for the mobile market.

Facebook and the [American Civil Liberties Union](http://www.aclu.org/) (ACLU)
have [filed](http://arstechnica.com/tech-policy/2012/08/facebook-and-the-aclu-
tell-court-a-like-is-protected-speech/) amicus briefs with the 4th US Court of
Appeals to support five plaintiffs who lost cases at the US District Court of
Eastern Virginia in April, in which a judge
[ruled](http://www.scribd.com/doc/91406670/Bland-v-Roberts-4-11cv45-E-D-Va-
Apr-24-2012) that pressing “like” on a political candidate’s Facebook pages is
not protected by US Constitution. Facebook and ACLU argue “likes” are within
the scope of free speech in this case.

**Privacy**

The FTC [announced](http://www.ftc.gov/opa/2012/08/facebook.shtm) that
Facebook has agreed to make all future privacy settings to be “opt-in.” The
company will also undergo biennial privacy audits for the next 20 years led by
an independent third party.

Microsoft’s new Internet Explorer 10 will have [“Do Not
Track](http://donottrack.us/)” features turned on by
[default](http://blogs.technet.com/b/microsoft_on_the_issues/archive/2012/08/07/do-
not-track-in-the-windows-8-set-up-experience.aspx), meaning behavioral
tracking will be denied to third party advertisers and websites. Other web
[browsers](http://www.networkworld.com/news/2012/081312-do-not-
track-261606.html) such as Firefox and Safari offer Do Not Track for users as
an opt-in feature, while IE 10 users will have to opt-out in their settings.

[Patrick Ball,](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Patrick_Ball) one of the
designers of encrypted human rights bulletin
[Martus](https://www.martus.org/), published an [op-
ed](http://www.wired.com/threatlevel/2012/08/wired_opinion_patrick_ball/all/)
in Wired that argues for more skepticism about secure communications tools. A
[debate](http://www.wired.com/threatlevel/2012/08/security-researchers/all/)
about how to promote encryption software began on Wired following an article
[published](http://www.wired.com/threatlevel/2012/07/crypto-cat-encryption-
for-
all/all/?utm_source=Contextly&utm_medium=RelatedLinks&utm_campaign=Previous)
presenting the encrypted chat service [CryptoCat](https://crypto.cat/). ****
****

**Copyright**

TechDirt
[reported](http://www.techdirt.com/articles/20120806/11053019945/curiositys-
mars-landing-video-disappears-youtube-due-to-bogus-copyright-claim.shtml) the
removal of a video of the Curiosity rover on Mars due to an erroneous
copyright claim. NASA’s Deputy Associate Administrator for Communications, Bob
Jacobs, said they spend a significant amount of time on administrative
processes due to needless copyright claims and called for YouTube to build
more ‘common sense’ into its processes.

The US “Six Strikes” anti-piracy bill has been
[delayed](http://torrentfreak.com/efficiency-tests-delay-u-s-six-strikes-anti-
piracy-scheme-120809/) for later this year. According to a Center for
Copyright Information Advisory Board member, the reasons are the language to
be used for the warnings and the fine-tuning of the alert emails to be sent to
pirating subscribers.

The popular BitTorrent tracker Demonoid has been [shut
down](http://torrentfreak.com/demonoid-busted-as-a-gift-to-the-united-states-
government-120806/?utm_source=dlvr.it&utm_medium=twitter) by Ukrainian
authorities after a police raid in the data center Colocall where Demonoid’s
servers were hosted. Meanwhile, it was reported that [Mexican
police](http://torrentfreak.com/demonoid-raid-credited-to-ifpi-multiple-
arrests-in-mexico-reported-120809/) have arrested several people and seized
assets related to Demonoid. Demonoid
[domains](http://torrentfreak.com/demonoid-domains-go-up-for-sale-120812/)
have already gone up in the market for sale.

BitTorrent [announced](http://blog.bittorrent.com/2012/08/07/the-internet-
archive-releases-over-1000000-files-of-freely-downloadable-music-movies-and-
books-via-bittorrent/) the availability of more than 1,000,000 files of freely
downloadable music, movies and books. Those have been released by the
[Internet Archive](http://archive.org/index.php), a non-profit online library
promoting “universal access to knowledge”.

**Censorship**

Jordan’s Telecommunication Regulation Commission ordered Internet service
providers there to [block
pornography](http://www.menafn.com/menafn/1093540854/Jordan-Internet-freedom-
activists-slam-ministrys-call-to-block-porn-sites). Jordan’s [Ministry of
Information and Communication Technology](http://www.moict.gov.jo/ar-
jo/%D8%A7%D9%84%D8%B5%D9%81%D8%AD%D8%A9%D8%A7%D9%84%D8%B1%D8%A6%D9%8A%D8%B3%D9%8A%D8%A9.aspx)
(ar) also [announced](https://www.eff.org/deeplinks/2012/08/eff-jordanian-
ministry-information-keep-internet-open) it would work with an unnamed
Australian company to develop systems to filter pornographic websites.

China’s popular microblog [Sina Weibo](http://weibo.com/) [zh] experienced
[“limited” ](http://www.bbc.com/news/technology-19196140)service during the
murder trial of [Gu
Kailai](http://www.newyorker.com/online/blogs/evanosnos/2012/08/the-gu-kailai-
murder-trial-the-rashomon-version.html), the wife of a former Communist Party
member, who is charged with murdering British businessman Neil Heywood.

The Pakistan Telecommunications Authority has
[asked](http://www.thenews.com.pk/Todays-News-13-16721-PTA-orders-blocking-of-
scandalous-stuff-on-internet) the country’s Internet service providers to
block web links that direct to sites containing scandalous materials,
including an audio recording of two parliament members engaged in a “sensual”
conversation.

The Israeli Communication Minister has
[required](http://www.israelnationalnews.com/News/News.aspx/158718#.UCnCaT2PVzr)
Internet service providers to provide customers with free tools to filter
obscene content.

A Brazilian judge
[ordered](http://www.google.com/hostednews/afp/article/ALeqM5hmKSeL3HuZytuRQnbqwuRISiV2Uw?do)
[es] Facebook to be blocked in the country for 24 hours because the company
violated a previous ruling which asked Facebook to take down a page defaming a
politician who is running for re-election. The judge later
[suspended](http://eleicoes.uol.com.br/2012/noticias/2012/08/11/juiz-suspende-
liminar-que-determina-retirada-do-facebook-do-ar.htm) [pt] the order after
Facebook agreed to cooperate.

Also in Brazil, the Justice of the Brazilian Federal Supreme Court [Gilmar
Mendes](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gilmar_Mendes) has
[ordered](http://knightcenter.utexas.edu/en/node/11037) police to investigate
Wikipedia because the online encyclopedia has published a post which contains
information the Justice has deemed distorted and ideological.

**Netizen Activism**

Malaysian websites, netizens and advocacy groups organized a [Web blackout
](http://www.freemalaysiatoday.com/category/opinion/2012/08/08/cij-launches-
internet-blackout-day/)day on Aug. 14 to protest the recently-passed [Section
114A](http://www.malaysia-
chronicle.com/index.php?option=com_k2&view=item&id=38122:repeal-
section-114a-of-evidence-act-malaysian-bar-tells-govt&Itemid=2) amendment of
the Evidence Act of 1950, which would place the [presumption of
guilt](http://www.malaysia-
chronicle.com/index.php?option=com_k2&view=item&id=38122:repeal-
section-114a-of-evidence-act-malaysian-bar-tells-govt&Itemid=2) for defamatory
online posts against coffee shop owners and others who administer, operate or
provide spaces for blogging activity. The blackout, launched by Malaysia’s
[Center for Independent Journalism](http://cijmalaysia.org/), was modeled
after the website strike on Jan. 18, 2012, to protest the [Stop Online Piracy
Act](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Protests_against_SOPA_and_PIPA) (SOPA). ****
****

**Cybersecurity**

Researchers at Kaspersky Lab also
[revealed](http://arstechnica.com/security/2012/08/nation-sponsored-malware-
has-mystery-warhead/) that state-sponsored malware named “Gauss” may have
connections with other similar espionage software such as
[Stuxnet](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Stuxnet) and
[Flame](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Flame_%28malware%29). Gauss can extract
information from computers and has affected thousands of machines mainly
located in the Middle East.

A group of researchers scanned the Internet and
[found](http://phys.org/news/2012-08-minding-ps-qs.html) that many public
keys, which are issued along with certificates by websites to establish secure
online connections, are not generated randomly enough and are easily decoded
by malicious users. The researchers said that the vulnerable public keys were
mostly for firewalls and VPN servers.

Apple has temporarily
[held](http://www.mercurynews.com/business/ci_21263941/apple-changes-security-
features-after-embarrassing-episode-hacker-mat-honan) its over-the-phone
password reset service after [Wired.com](http://www.wired.com/) journalist Mat
Honan was [hacked](http://www.wired.com/gadgetlab/2012/08/apple-amazon-mat-
honan-hacking/) and lost his data stored in iPad, iPhone, Macbook as well as
Gmail. The hackers obtained the last four digits of Honan’s credit card, then
used it to call Apple’s customer support to change the password of his AppleID
account, thus gained access to all his accounts.

Wikileaks’ main website and its mirror sites
[experienced](http://www.itnews.com.au/News/311740,wikileaks-suffers-massive-
ddos-attack.aspx) a prolonged distributed denial-of-service (DDoS) attack last
week. The organization speculated that the attack may be related to the
Olympic Games or the release of Stratfor and Syria documents.

**Surveillance**

Public Intelligence [analyzes](https://publicintelligence.net/unravelling-
trapwire/) TrapWire, a global surveillance system allegedly used worldwide.
The data about this software originates from hacked emails from the privately
held intelligence company Stratfor and [published by
WikiLeaks](http://wl.wikileaks-press.org/gifiles/releasedate/2012-08-09.html).

A researcher at computer security company
[Rapid7](https://community.rapid7.com/community/infosec/blog/2012/08/08/finfisher)
[found](http://thehackernews.com/2012/08/finfisher-spyware-found-running-
on.html) that [Finfisher](http://www.finfisher.com/FinFisher/en/index.php),
surveillance software created by the British company Gamma International, is
running at computers based in many countries including Australia, Czech
Republic, United Arab Emirates, Ethiopia, Estonia, and Mongolia.

**Thuggery**

On August 8, The independent Hong Kong news website
[inmediahk.net](http://www.inmediahk.net/) [zh] was
[raided](https://advocacy.globalvoicesonline.org/2012/08/09/hong-kong-citizen-
media-office-attacked/) by masked men who pretended to offer donations to the
organization and ravaged computer equipment in the office.

[Dinh Dang Dinh](http://en.rsf.org/vietnamese-blogger-gets-six-
years-10-08-2012,43204.html), a former Vietnamese military officer and now a
blogger advocating democratic reform in Vietnam, has been sentenced to 6 years
in jail for criticizing the Vietnamese Communist Party and the government
online.

Authorities in Ethiopia
[arrested](http://www.cjr.org/behind_the_news/ethiopia_news_crackdown.php) and
charged [Temesgen
Desalegn](http://www.article19.org/resources.php/resource/3406/en/ethiopia:-charges-
against-feteh-newspaper-editor-temesgen-desalegn-must-be-dropped) with
defamation and “spreading false rumors,” 12 days after the government shut
down Feteh, the newspaper he edits. The newspaper’s last issue featured
article about [Muslim protests](http://www.cpj.org/2012/08/ethiopian-
authorities-crack-down-on-muslim-press.php) and the poor health of Ethiopian
Prime Minister [Meles Zenawi](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Meles_Zenawi), who
has ruled since 1995. Free speech advocates fear the [Telecom Fraud Offences
Law](http://www.article19.org/resources.php/resource/3401/en/ethiopia:-proclamation-
on-telecom-fraud-offences) could lead to restrictions against Facebook.

Since August, 20 [Omani netizens](http://en.rsf.org/oman-prison-for-
netizens-09-08-2012,43191.html) have been sentenced to jail and fined for
criticizing the Sultan of Oman on the Internet and for “illegal assembly”.
********

**Internet Governance**

Representatives from Germany, Spain, the United Kingdom, the Netherlands,
Belgium, and European Police Office (Europol), will meet in September to
[discuss](http://arstechnica.com/tech-policy/2012/08/europes-quixotic-plan-to-
clean-the-internet-of-
terrorists/?utm_source=feedburner&utm_medium=feed&utm_campaign=Feed:+arstechnica/index+\(Ars+Technica+-+All+content\)&utm_content=Google+Reader)
the [Clean IT project](http://www.cleanitproject.eu/), which aims to develop a
flagging system encouraging Internet Service Providers to take down terrorist
content. The project has ignited debate over where the governments should draw
the line on online speech.

The [Internet Corporation for Assigned Names and Numbers
(ICANN)](http://www.icann.org/) has extended its comment period on
applications for [generic top-level domains
(gTLD's)](http://newgtlds.icann.org/en/),
[reportedly](http://domainincite.com/10094-enjoy-your-weekend-icann-extends-
new-gtld-comment-
period?utm_source=feedburner&utm_medium=feed&utm_campaign=Feed%3A+DomainIncite+%28DomainIncite.com%29)
in response to pressure from the US government and intellectual property
interests.

**Net Neutrality**

[Measurement Lab](http://www.measurementlab.net/), a Google-backed platform
empowering Internet connection research, has
[updated](http://dpi.ischool.syr.edu/ISPtable.html) data on how ISPs in
different countries throttle traffic of peer-to-peer file sharing platform
[BitTorrent](http://www.bittorrent.com/). ********

**Cool Things**

The [Internet Society](http://www.internetsociety.org/) is seeking applicants
for its [Community Grants Programme.](http://www.internetsociety.org/what-we-
do/grants-and-awards/grants/community-grants) The
[criteria](http://www.internetsociety.org/what-we-do/grants-and-
awards/grants/community-grants/criteria) include: “fostering an open,
innovative, and trusted Internet worldwide” and “empowering people to achieve
human potential through unencumbered Internet use.”

A documentary by [Al Jazeera
English](http://www.aljazeera.com/programmes/faultlines/) called “[Controlling
the Web](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=6FD9urcUWXw)” looks into the fight
for control of the Internet and the US anti-piracy legislation threatening
Internet freedom.

Cyberwar plays a role in the upcoming movie “Red Dawn,” as indicated in the
[trailer ](http://www.theatlantic.com/international/archive/2012/08/the-
ridiculous-red-dawn-remake-is-even-more-absurd-than-you-think/261009/)for the
remake of the 1984 [film](http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0087985/), in which
invading forces cause a massive blackout using an electromagnetic pulse or
hacking device.

**Publications and Studies**

  * Eli Dourado:[ Internet Security Without Law: How Service Providers Create Online Order. ](http://mercatus.org/publication/internet-security-without-law-how-service-providers-create-order-online)
  * Benjamin Bidder: [Russia Battles Online Foes and Freedoms. ](http://www.spiegel.de/international/spiegel/growing-russian-internet-power-both-a-boon-and-worry-to-kremlin-a-849125.html)
  * Internews Center for Innovation & Learning: [Digital Security and Journalists: A Snapshot of Awareness and Practice in Pakistan](http://content.bytesforall.pk/node/62)
  * Association for Progressive Communications: [Azerbaijan: Q&A on Human Rights and the Internet](http://www.apc.org/en/news/azerbaijan-qampa-human-rights-and-internet).

******_**[Subscribe to the Netizen Report by
email](http://feedburner.google.com/fb/a/mailverify?uri=NetizenReport)**_**

**For upcoming events related to the future of citizen rights in the digital
age, see the[ Global Voices Events
Calendar](https://www.google.com/calendar/embed?src=9o8so5err9tvamd9t0ri9t181o%40group.calendar.google.com&ctz=America/New_York).**

