[![Image by Flickr user Leo Reynolds \(CC BY-NC-SA
2.0\).](https://advocacy.globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2012/06/Copyright-300x300.jpg)](http://www.flickr.com/photos/lwr/2615591602/)

Image by Flickr user Leo Reynolds (CC BY-NC-SA 2.0).

**Most of this report was researched, written, and edited by[Tom
Risen](https://advocacy.globalvoicesonline.org/author/tomrisen/), [Weiping
Li](https://advocacy.globalvoicesonline.org/author/weiping-li/), [James
Losey](https://advocacy.globalvoicesonline.org/author/jameswlosey/), and
[Sarah Myers](https://advocacy.globalvoicesonline.org/author/sarahbmyers/).**

Disproportionate penalties for copyright violations have reached new heights
in Japan with the [passage](http://www.techinasia.com/japan-anti-download-
bill/) of a new bill this month that will make downloading copyrighted
material punishable by
[imprisonment](http://www.wired.com/gamelife/2012/06/japan-downloading-law/)
or fines. Previously, imprisonment was possible for uploading files, but this
bill expands the penalty to downloaders as well. The bill will go into effect
on October 1.

This is not the only recent law to criminalize copyright infringement.
Canada’s House of Commons has
[passed](http://www.cbc.ca/news/politics/story/2012/06/19/pol-copyright-bill-
passed-commons.html) a copyright bill that penalizes circumvention of digital
rights management as well as imposes fines on copyright violations. The bill
is expected to pass the Senate. Artists in Hong Kong are also
[resisting](https://advocacy.globalvoicesonline.org/2012/04/27/hong-kong-
artists-against-copyright-amendment-bill/) an amendment to criminalize
copyright infringement beyond “beyond minor economic damage” in a manner
eliminates fair use for the creation of derivative works. A French law called
HADOPI instituted in 2009 requires Internet Service Providers (ISP) to sever a
user’s Internet connection after downloading copyrighted content three times,
a law which United Nations Special Rapporteur Frank la Rue
[called](http://www2.ohchr.org/english/bodies/hrcouncil/docs/17session/A.HRC.17.27_en.pdf)
“a violation of article 19” on the [right to free
expression](http://www2.ohchr.org/english/law/ccpr.htm#art19) of the United
Nations Universal Declaration of Human Rights.

In Europe, due to civil society pressure, governments are increasingly
attentive to how copyright enforcement affects human rights and free
expression. For this reason, the European Union’s (EU) International Trade
Committee
[recommended](http://www.techdirt.com/articles/20120621/03442219413/fifth-eu-
committee-recommends-rejection-acta-european-parliament.shtml) that the
European Parliament reject the Anti-Counterfeiting Trade Agreement (ACTA),
which seeks multinational standards for intellectual property rights. This is
the fifth EU committee to vote against the agreement. The European Parliament
is [expected to vote](http://online.wsj.com/article/BT-
CO-20120621-711947.html) on the agreement on July 4. **** ****

**Thuggery**

****Several Twitter activists in Sudan have
been[arrested](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2012/06/23/sudan-protests-
trigger-arrest-of-twitter-activists/) by police and National Intelligence
Security Service officials, including Usamah Mohammed Ali, who tweeted about
arrests made during protests on June 22, in the capital of Khartoum and
promoted more protests slated for June 30. The protests in Sudan’s [capital
city](http://www.aljazeera.com/video/africa/2012/06/201262545747456418.html)
are a response to planned austerity measures by the government in the wake of
the secession of South Sudan last year. Bloggers are following the protests on
Twitter via #FreeUsamah or #Sudanrevolts. **** ****

**Censorship**

Also in Sudan, bloggers are tweeting about rumors that the government plans to
[shut down the Internet ](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2012/06/22/sudan-
netizens-verify-internet-blackout-rumours/)to prevent the Khartoum austerity
protests from growing.

Google [blocked access ](http://news.yahoo.com/citing-sanctions-google-blocks-
analytics-tool-cuba-160550397.html)to its [Google
Analytics](http://www.google.com/analytics/) web statistics feature in Cuba to
comply with United States (US) sanctions. Other countries where some Google
features are restricted include Myanmar (Burma), Iran, Syria, Sudan, and North
Korea.

Belarusian police [arrested](http://www.reuters.com/article/2012/06/23/us-
poland-belarus-journalist-idUSBRE85M0GK20120623) Andrzej Poczobut, the foreign
correspondent of Polish newspaper Gazeta Wyborcza, on June 21, in Grodno for
libelling Belarusian President [Alexander
Lukashenko](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Alexander_Lukashenko), who has been
in power since 1994. Poland’s Deputy Foreign Minister Jerzy Pomianowski
demanded Poczobut’s release. Last year Poczobut spent three months in prison
for a similar offense and now faces five years in prison, which activists say
would encourage [self-
censorship](http://www.charter97.org/en/news/2012/6/22/54181/). **** ****

**Internet governance**

Fadi Chehadé will be the [new president](http://www.domainnews.com/en/fadi-
chehade-named-new-icann-ceo-and-president.html) and chief executive officer of
the Internet Corporation for Assigned Names and Numbers
([ICANN](http://www.icann.org/)), a nonprofit in charge of assigning domain
name spaces and coordinating Internet protocol address spaces. During his
[speech ](http://www.thedomains.com/2012/06/25/new-icann-ceo-fadi-chehade-
impresses-in-opening-session-the-internet-is-the-greatest-public-gift/)at
ICANN’s 44th set of public meetings in Prague on Monday 25 June, Chehadé
promised to make all his decisions for the public interest and to place a
priority on transparency.

The [European Telecommunications Network Operators](http://www.etno.eu/)
(ETNO) has proposed [changing the
regulations](http://www.google.com/hostednews/ap/article/ALeqM5grk_nm95mYWlak0H7vEOTeh0xvBg?docId=466884216d984cb8a996f43af694b37f)
set by the International Telecommunications Union (ITU) by introducing new
fees for online content delivery in an effort to shift revenue from Internet
content providers and applications. The nonprofit [Center for Democracy and
Technology](https://www.cdt.org/) warns that this proposal slated for the
World Conference on Telecommunications
([WCIT](http://www.itu.int/en/wcit-12/Pages/default.aspx)) in December could
[negatively impact ](https://www.cdt.org/blogs/cynthia-wong/2106radical-
proposal-now-table-itu)Internet costs and freedoms for users in developing
countries.

During the June 14-15 [European Dialogue on Internet
Governance](http://www.eurodig.org/eurodig-2012/programme) (EuroDIG)
telecommunications conference, discussions by speakers such as European
Parliament Member [Marietje Schaake](http://www.marietjeschaake.com/) called
for an increased role for civil society in [Internet policy](http://www.ip-
watch.org/2012/06/18/eurodig-will-governments-let-civil-society-rescue-net-
governance/) processes. The EuroDIG organization is the regional chapter of
the United Nations’ [Internet Governance
Forum](http://www.intgovforum.org/cms/), which is a multi-stakeholder debate
platform for global Internet policy.

On June 20 the Secretary General Hamadoun Touré of the International
Telecommunications Union ([ITU](http://www.itu.int/en/Pages/default.aspx))
addressed a [working group](http://www.itu.int/council/groups/cwg-
wcit12/index.html) planning the December World Conference on
Telecommunications ([WCIT](http://www.itu.int/en/wcit-12/Pages/default.aspx)),
and proposed greater transparency for the process. Touré alluded to an [open
letter](http://netizenproject.org/2012/06/21/itu-chief-supports-transparency-
for-wcit/) requesting transparency which was sent in May and signed by a
number of civil society organizations. The letter expressed concerns that the
upcoming WCIT could expand the ITU’s communications governance to include the
Internet. **** ****

**National policy**

Russia’s government is planning to create its own Facebook-style [social
network](http://www.guardian.co.uk/world/2012/jun/19/russia-kremilin-facebook-
social-network), slated to launch in June and attract private capital. Russia
recently overtook Germany as the European country with the [most Internet
users](http://themoscownews.com/business/20120418/189642926.html), so this is
criticized as a state effort to co-opt the Internet rather than suppress it.

China’s government will spend the next two months reviewing a proposal for the
[Broadband China Project](http://news.flanders-china.be/government-
pushes-%E2%80%9Cbroadband-china%E2%80%9D-project), which would [expand
broadband access](http://eandt.theiet.org/news/2012/jun/china-broadband.cfm)
to 35 million new households in urban and rural areas.

Hamburg, Germany, passed a new [transparency
law](http://www.freedominfo.org/2012/06/hamburg-supplements-foi-law-with-
disclosure-mandate/) requiring government to [publish all public
data](http://blog.transparency.org/2012/06/25/hamburgs-transparency-law-to-
open-government-more-than-ever/) in an information register. **** ****

**Netizen activism**

As Mexico’s presidential election approaches on July 1, the online activist
movement ‘Yo Soy 132’ hosted an [online presidential debate
](http://www.globalpost.com/dispatch/news/regions/americas/mexico/120620/televisa-
yosoy132-protest-presidential-debate-mexican-election)as part of its goal to
bring more objectivity to the media and the presidential campaign process.
University students used the hashtag #YoSoy132 to rally hundreds of thousands
for marches after posting video on Twitter to refute media claims that they
were “porros” or thugs paid by Leftist politicians, for
[protesting](http://www.reuters.com/article/2012/06/24/us-mexico-election-
leftist-idUSBRE85N0EV20120624) against [Enrique Peña
Nieto](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Enrique_Pe%C3%B1a_Nieto). Peña Nieto is
the front-runner candidate for the Mexican presidency and member of the
[Institutional Revolutionary
Party](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Institutional_Revolutionary_Party) (also
known as the PRI).

The Army Court of Criminal Appeals [denied a request
](http://www.google.com/hostednews/ap/article/ALeqM5gUmNwQCTrMG4jsJEO3r7UQpdfZtA?docId=18ff8328de0c4158a7db559f8b596d49)from
the [Center for Constitutional Rights](http://ccrjustice.org/) for access to
the court documents of Pfc. Bradley Manning, the intelligence analyst charged
with aiding the enemy by allegedly leaking diplomatic cables and Iraq war data
to whistleblower data website [WikiLeaks](http://wikileaks.org/). Manning
could face [life
imprisonment](http://www.cbsnews.com/8301-505245_162-57460342/wikileaks-
prosecutors-must-detail-evidence-search/) for this charge.

WikiLeaks founder Julian Assange is afraid of being extradited to the United
States to face similar charges, so the Australian citizen is [seeking asylum
](http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-2164321/Julian-Assange-demands-
diplomatic-assurances-extradited-US-WikiLeaks-revelations.html?ito=feeds-
newsxml)in the Embassy of Ecuador in London after a United Kingdom court ruled
he could be extradited to Sweden to face sex abuse charges. **** ****

**Sovereigns of cyberspace**

Last Thursday 21 June, Twitter
[suffered](http://www.zdnet.com/blog/btl/twitter-quietly-grows-up-handles-its-
scandal/80620?tag=main;top-stories) a considerable outage. The company
[clarified](http://blog.twitter.com/2012/06/todays-turbulence-explained.html)
that the outage was not the result of a hack but a system bug. **** ****

**Privacy**

A security researcher has
[revealed](http://www.wired.com/threatlevel/2012/06/klik-app-vulnerability/)
that KLIK, a mobile application that allows real time face tagging for photos
uploaded to Facebook, had a vulnerability that would allow anyone to access
private authentication information for KLIK users’ Facebook or Twitter
accounts. A user could then post as another user or access their photos. Last
week, Face.com, software company that develops KLIK, was acquired by Facebook
for as much as US $100 million. **** ****

**Copyright**

ISPs in Denmark are [working on a voluntary
](http://www.theregister.co.uk/2012/06/22/all_danish_isps_will_block_content_on_single_court_order_under_proposed_code/)Code
of Conduct that would include blocking websites even if a court order only
applies to one ISP in the nation. Court orders in the UK require ISPs to block
content and British Telecom has agreed to block access to [Pirate
Bay](http://thepiratebay.se/); the block has [already been
circumvented](http://news.cnet.com/8301-1023_3-57457001-93/u.k.s-largest-isp-
blocks-the-pirate-bay-but-to-no-avail/?part=rss&subj=news&tag=title). ****
****

**Cybersecurity**

Malware based on PCs has impacted thousands of printers, [ZDNet
reports](http://www.zdnet.com/blog/security/thousands-of-office-printers-hit-
by-gibberish-malware/12550?tag=main;top-stories). The malware places a file on
the printer queue, continuously printing documents as long as the printer is
on and has paper. **** ****

**Cool things**

The [Knight Foundation](http://www.knightfoundation.org/) has awarded US $1.37
million to [six winners](http://www.poynter.org/latest-news/top-
stories/177642/news-challenge-funds-6-projects-focused-on-networks/) of the
Knight News Challenge with projects to solve problems of journalism using
online networks. Winners include the [Tor
Project](https://www.torproject.org/), which will work on tools to help people
in politically dangerous parts of the world to publish and communicate safely
with sources. **** ****

**Publications and studies**

  * Mobile Active: [mClerk:Enabling Crowdsourcing in Developing Regions](http://www.mobileactive.org/research/mclerk-enabling-mobile-crowdsourcing-developing-regions)
  * Open Society Foundations: [Mapping Digital Media: Macedonia](http://www.soros.org/reports/mapping-digital-media-macedonia)
  * New York Times Op-Ed by Columbia Law Professor Tim Wu: ‘[Free Speech for Computers?](http://www.nytimes.com/2012/06/20/opinion/free-speech-for-computers.html?_r=3&partner=rss&emc=rss)‘

For upcoming events related to the future of citizen rights in the digital
age, see the[ Global Voices Events
Calendar](https://www.google.com/calendar/embed?src=9o8so5err9tvamd9t0ri9t181o%40group.calendar.google.com&ctz=America/New_York).

_**[Subscribe to the Netizen Report by
email](http://feedburner.google.com/fb/a/mailverify?uri=NetizenReport)**_

