[![Facebook photo posted to promote harmony in Myanmar. Image by New
Mandala.](https://advocacy.globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2012/06/myanmar.jpg)](http://asiapacific.anu.edu.au/newmandala/2012/06/15/voices-
of-moderation-on-burmese-facebook/#more-19362)

Facebook photo posted to promote harmony in Myanmar. Image by New Mandala.

**Most of this report was researched, written, and edited by[Tom
Risen](https://advocacy.globalvoicesonline.org/author/tomrisen/), [Weiping
Li](https://advocacy.globalvoicesonline.org/author/weiping-li/), [Grady
Johnson](https://advocacy.globalvoicesonline.org/author/gradyjohnson/), and
[Sarah Myers](https://advocacy.globalvoicesonline.org/author/sarahbmyers/).**

Myanmar’s resolve for an open Internet is being tested this week as the
government declared a state of emergency on June 10, to contain [deadly
clashes](http://www.nytimes.com/2012/06/11/world/asia/state-of-emergency-
declared-in-western-myanmar.html?_r=1) between Muslims and Buddhists in the
nation’s western Rakhine state. The country’s military junta was dissolved in
2011, so the government's response to [website
comments](http://www.huffingtonpost.com/2012/06/14/myanmar-conflict-rohingya-
muslims_n_1595976.html) inciting hate and murder could set a new tone for
freedom of expression as the state goes through a seminal transitional moment.

Despite moves toward democracy, Myanmar was still listed as one of the
‘[Enemies of the
Internet](http://march12.rsf.org/i/Report_EnemiesoftheInternet_2012.pdf)‘ this
year by free speech advocacy group Reporters Without Borders. The government
began [political reforms
](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/2011%E2%80%932012_Burmese_political_reforms)last
year and has increased [access to the
Internet](http://www.economist.com/node/21548996) by lowering firewalls that
had blocked social media such as Facebook and the use of VoIP software.

The conflict between Buddhists and the Muslim Rohingya minority has galvanized
[Internet
activity](http://online.wsj.com/article/SB10001424052702303444204577458381714792276.html)
in this developing nation, but [hate
speech](http://www.google.com/hostednews/afp/article/ALeqM5hbTH6wsANhnvf_zA9LGpyLgDPWQw?docId=CNG.e54088ac28a6d1e98bcefa2915639abf.3b1),
ruthless pictures of dead bodies and street protests have spread quickly
online. The independent Burmese website Democratic Voice of Burma also had its
server overwhelmed in a [Distributed Denial of Service
attack](http://www.dvb.no/news/hackers-target-dvb-website/22389) (DDoS) by
hacker group Blink, which used computers with IP addresses based in Singapore
or Russia. The [Blink website](http://www.blinkhackergroup.org/search?updated-
max=2012-06-10T12:22:00%2B06:30&max-results=14&start=14&by-date=false) posted
numerous anti-Islamist messages including “Get Out From Our Land .. Rohingya
.. We Love RaKhine .. We Love Myanmar”, directing comments at the Muslim
minority, which traces its origins to neighboring Bangladesh.

Myanmar’s government remains silent on these social media messages, but
military officials have [warned](http://en.rsf.org/burma-media-accused-of-
biased-coverage-12-06-2012,42771.html) news media not to inflame the conflict
through their reporting and demanded all articles be submitted for government
review before publication. As in many countries under transition, it remains
to be seen whether Internet freedom can survive this political and
humanitarian crisis. Meanwhile, the struggle for online freedom continues
around the world: ****

**Censorship**

Last week, the independent news agency Asia Plus was [inaccessible for several
days](http://www.rferl.org/content/tajik-news-agency-cut/24612846.html) in
Tajikistan. While officials cited “maintenance reasons”, critics argued that
this was a deliberate act of censorship, as readers of the site had posted
comments critical of the regime. In March [Facebook was
inaccessible](http://www.rferl.org/content/tajik_groups_condemn_blocking_of_facebook_news_websites/24506665.html)
in the country along with three Russian-language news websites due to
“technical reasons”.

To increase transparency in examples of “soft censorship,” when authorities
obscure details on what content is blocked, Google developers have proposed a
[new HTTP status code](http://www.theverge.com/2012/6/12/3080036/tim-bray-
http-status-code-451-unavailable-legal). Under the proposal a browser would
return the status code “451: Unavailable for Legal Reasons” when someone
attempts to access a restricted site. The error message would include details
about the relevant laws, the legal authority behind the restrictions and the
class of content targeted.

Google's latest transparency report reveals an increasing trend of governments
seeking [removal of political
content](http://googleblog.blogspot.nl/2012/06/more-transparency-into-
government.html) between July and December 2011. Such [content removal
requests](http://www.google.com/transparencyreport/removals/government/) came
from law enforcement and governments in “Western democracies not typically
associated with censorship”. Notable mentions include a request granted to
British police for the removal of 640 videos allegedly supporting terrorism;
in India content removal requests increased 49 percent since the last six
month reporting period.

Iran’s online monitoring task force announced plans to [crack down on virtual
private networks
](http://www.iranfocus.com/en/index.php?option=com_content&view=article&id=25337:iran-
to-crack-down-on-web-censor-beating-software&catid=4:iran-
general&Itemid=26)(VPNs), which an estimated 20-30 percent of Iranians use to
circumvent restrictions on content within Iran.

The top-level domain name registry “.co.jp”, which is used mainly by Japanese
companies, was [blocked
](https://advocacy.globalvoicesonline.org/2012/06/18/china-top-domain-co-jp-
blocked-temporarily/)for 30 hours on June 15 by China’s national firewall for
unknown reasons. This marks the [first time
](http://thenextweb.com/asia/2012/06/18/chinas-great-firewall-blocks-its-
first-top-level-domain-as-co-jp-sites-go-down-for-30-hours/)China’s Internet
censors have filtered an entire top-level domain. The sites were made
accessible again on June 16.

**Thuggery**

Police in Azerbaijan released 23-year-old video blogger and pro-democracy
activist [Mehman Huseynov](http://www.amnesty.org/en/news/azerbaijan-
retaliates-against-eurovision-democracy-activists-2012-06-13) on bail last
night, after his arrest for allegedly assaulting police while covering the
2012 Eurovision Song Contest protests to highlight human rights abuse in that
country. Huseynov may be jailed for up to five years if convicted.

After being arrested on May 29 while leaving an Internet cafe, Moroccan
blogger [Mohamed Sokrate](http://www.northafricaunited.com/Morocco-Blogger-
Gets-Two-Year-Jail-Sentence-On-Trumped-Up-Drug-Charges_a1724.html) was
sentenced to two years in prison for “drug trafficking and possession,” in a
trial fellow activists claim was unfair and hasty because of Sokrate’s
criticism of the monarchy. An activist group is rallying for a retrial, and
Sokrate’s lawyer said Moroccan authorities ignored evidence, such as the
arrest of his father and brother in a possible effort to pressure Sokrate into
acknowledging his “guilt”.

Since the end of May the Omani government has
[arrested](http://www.amnesty.org/en/news/oman-activist-arrests-threaten-
freedom-expression-2012-06-15) at least 33 bloggers and activists who have
urged government reform, following up on a June 4 statement warning that it
will take legal action against those who publish content deemed offensive or
that incites action “under the the pretext of freedom of expression”.
Activists told Human Rights Watch that they believe authorities have increased
[surveillance and hacking](http://www.hrw.org/news/2012/06/13/oman-assault-
freedom-speech) activities in recent weeks.

**National policy**

British Justice Secretary Ken Clarke proposed amending a defamation law to
require international websites such as Twitter and Facebook to [reveal the
identities](http://www.pcmag.com/article2/0,2817,2405669,00.asp) of users who
post harassing anonymous comments upon request. ****

**Surveillance**

The British government also
[presented](http://www.washingtonpost.com/world/europe/mass-surveillance-uk-
releases-new-details-of-plan-to-track-all-citizens-
communications/2012/06/14/gJQARl53bV_story.html) a draft bill to require
Internet Service Providers (ISPs) to record all online and mobile activities
and even track postal mail. All this data would be stored and made available
to authorities for a year. A [petition
campaign](https://secure.38degrees.org.uk/page/s/stop-government-
snooping#petition) by progressive non-profit 38 Degrees calls on British Prime
Minister David Cameron to stop the bill.

In the recent [Telecom
Edition](https://advocacy.globalvoicesonline.org/2012/06/07/netizenreport-
telecom/) of the Netizen Report, we highlighted the use of Deep Packet
Inspection (DPI) by Ethio-Telecom to surveil netizens in Ethiopia. According
to French newspaper La Croix, the French company France Telecom helped the
Ethiopian government to implement its DPI activities, as part of a two-year
agreement to take over the management of the Ethiopian telecoms network,
Ethio-Telecom. The French government is [one of France Telecom's main
shareholders](http://www.internetsansfrontieres.com/When-France-Telecom-Helps-
To-Monitor-Citizens-Of-An-Authoritarian-Regime_a434.html). ( **NOTE:** A
previous version of this item incorrectly characterized the relationship
between France Telecom and Ethio-Telecom. It was corrected on 24/6/2012.)

**Internet governance**

Our coverage continues this week on [leaked
documents](http://files.wcitleaks.org/public/CWG%20WCIT12%20TD62.pdf) that
were prepared for the 2012 World Conference on International
Telecommunications (WCIT), which is organized by the United Nation’s
International Telecommunications Union
([ITU](http://www.itu.int/Pages/VariationRoot.aspx)). A proposal by the
[Chinese
government](http://online.wsj.com/article/SB10001424052702303822204577470532859210296.html)
would allow member states to regulate communications infrastructure and
information technology companies’ operations in their territory. The
International Telecommunication Regulations (ITRs) slated for review would
regulate telephones and satellite orbits, but in December the WCIT may adopt
[proposals](http://techliberation.com/2012/06/14/troubling-internet-
regulations-proposed-for-wcit/) that include Internet regulation.

The Internet Corporation for Assigned Names and Numbers (ICANN), a United
States (US)-based non-profit responsible for domain name control, has released
a list of more than 2,000 applications for [new top-level
domains](http://newgtlds.icann.org/en/program-status/application-
results/strings-1200utc-13jun12-en). Each application for a new domain
(.google, for example) costs US$185,000, and requires a 10-year maintenance
agreement, which ICANN has estimated would cost applicants US$25,000 annually.
Critics argue the proposal is a [commercial
landgrab](http://www.guardian.co.uk/technology/2012/jun/13/icann-criticised-
commercial-landgrab-internet) by ICANN and that the [explosion of domain
names](http://memeburn.com/2012/06/why-the-expansion-of-tld-namespace-will-
cause-mayhem-on-the-
internet/?utm_source=twitterfeed&utm_medium=twitter&utm_campaign=Feed%3A+memeburncom+%28memeburn%29)
could make it harder to verify existing web brands, thus threatening security.

The majority of the nearly 2,000 applications came from rich companies such as
Google and Amazon. Approximately 911 came from North America, with only 17
from Africa. There are numerous [competing
claims](http://www.techdirt.com/articles/20120613/12491719310/rip-off-
highlights-top-level-domain-scrum.shtml) for domains such as .app, .home, and
.inc.

**Sovereigns of cyberspace**

Major Internet companies are finding new ways to leverage user information for
Internet advertisements. Facebook plans to launch [Facebook
Exchange](http://www.bloomberg.com/news/2012-06-13/facebook-to-debut-real-
time-bidding-for-advertising.html), which will provide advertisers with
information of Facebook users’ browsing history and let them bid on access to
users’ attention.

Non-profit news organization ProPublica also revealed that Microsoft and Yahoo
are [selling users’ information](http://www.propublica.org/article/how-
microsoft-and-yahoo-are-selling-politicians-access-to-you) entered during
website registration to allow US political campaigns to target voters with
online ads.

Meanwhile, Google, Facebook, Twitter, America Online and the Interactive
Advertising Bureau are working with Internet safety non-profit
[StopBadware](http://www.stopbadware.org/home/index) to launch an initiative
called ‘[Ads Integrity
Alliance](http://www.stopbadware.org/home/pr_06142012)‘. The alliance will
expand on StopBadware's mission to identify websites that engage in malicious
behaviour which harms users by sharing information about online advertisements
that compromise Internet users’ privacy and security, and developing policy
recommendations for web safety.

Australian online electronic store Kogan is the first online retailer to
collect a 6.8 percent [Internet Explorer 7
Tax](http://www.kogan.com/au/blog/new-internet-explorer-7-tax/) on its
customers who are using the outdated browser to shop in its online store. The
company says the tax is necessary “due to the amount of time required to make
Web pages appear correctly in IE7”.

In an effort to counter unwanted spam messaging the news-sharing website
[Reddit](http://www.reddit.com/) temporarily banned users from [submitting
](http://www.dailydot.com/news/reddit-ban-the-atlantic-phsyorg-
businessweek/)links to several major media websites, including
[Businessweek.com ](http://www.businessweek.com/)and
[TheAtlantic.com](http://www.theatlantic.com/). ****

**Privacy**

A Japanese man has sued Google for [violation of
privacy](http://www.deccanchronicle.com/channels/sci-tech/hitech/japanese-man-
sues-google-cyber-defamation-508) and demanded the company revise its
autocomplete search function, which suggests keywords automatically on Google
search. The man claimed this function inappropriately shows terms related to
crimes and defamatory articles when his name is typed in the search box, and
may have resulted in his rejection from several applications for jobs. ****

**Cybersecurity**

The websites for two South Korean newspapers were
[hacked](http://phys.org/news/2012-06-south-korean-paper-major-cyber.html)
last week, destroying the sites’ database and editing systems. The attack
happened after North Korea threatened to target several South Korean media
outlets that were critical of a children's event held in Pyongyang. South
Korean police are still
[investigating](http://www.esecurityplanet.com/hackers/north-korea-accused-of-
cyber-attack-on-south-korean-newspaper.html) whether North Korea was involved.

During the June 12 protests in Moscow against the Russian President Vladimir
Putin, independent media outlets in Russia were once again the targets of
[Distributed Denial of Service
](http://blogs.law.harvard.edu/herdict/2012/06/14/ddos-attacks-disable-
independent-news-sites-during-russian-protests/)(DDoS) attacks, which
overwhelm a website’s bandwidth. Putin reclaimed the Russian presidency for a
third term in March, and [independent media
organizations](https://advocacy.globalvoicesonline.org/2012/05/17/netizenreport-
runetedition/) in Russia have suffered repeated DDoS attacks to minimize
coverage of protests against his re-election. ****

**Cool things**

An iPhone app named [Siggly](http://ijnet.org/blog/lebanese-made-citizen-
journalism-app-uses-votes-determine-top-stories) will allow its users to
record, upload and geo-tag mini-news by iPhone, before using a feature similar
to [Reddit](http://www.reddit.com/) to allow communities vote for the top
stories. ****

**Publications and studies**

  * The Global Network Initiative: Report on [Digital Freedoms in International Law](http://www.globalnetworkinitiative.org/news/new-report-outlines-recommendations-governments-companies-and-others-how-protect-free)
  * Stanford University’s Center for Internet and Society: White Paper on [Net Neutrality and Quality of Service](http://cyberlaw.stanford.edu/publications/network-neutrality-and-quality-service-what-non-discrimination-rule-should-look)
  * South African Civil Society Information Service: [South Africa: The Turning Point for Internet Freedom](http://allafrica.com/stories/201206130117.html)
  * Kevin Macnish at the University of Leeds: [Unblinking eyes: the ethics of automating surveillance](http://www.springerlink.com/content/2j1252667gg02717/)

For upcoming events related to the future of citizen rights in the digital
age, see the[ Global Voices Events
Calendar](https://www.google.com/calendar/embed?src=9o8so5err9tvamd9t0ri9t181o%40group.calendar.google.com&ctz=America/New_York).

_**[Subscribe to the Netizen Report by
email](http://feedburner.google.com/fb/a/mailverify?uri=NetizenReport)**_

