![](https://globalvoices.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/10/make-wall-great-
again.jpg)

‘Make Wall Great Again’ cartoon by Chinese political artist Badiucao.

_The original version of this post was written by Holmes Chan
and[published](https://www.hongkongfp.com/2018/10/19/chinese-artist-badiucao-
sends-make-wall-great-caps-google-hq-amid-censorship-row/) on Hong Kong Free
Press (HKFP) on October 19, 2018. The republication is based on a partnership
agreement._

Chinese political cartoonist Badiucao sent a package of red baseball caps with
the words “Make Wall Great Again” to Google headquarters in China, to protest
the company's tentative plans to introduce a censored search engine there.

Badiucao — a Chinese-born artist and activist who now lives abroad — told HKFP
that he sent about a dozen red caps to random Google employees. He also left
another dozen on sculptures around Google’s United States headquarters and
sent a package of 50 caps to Google’s visitor shop.

Badiucao said the caps were a response to the search giant’s potential re-
entry into China:

“I want [Google] to know it is a mistake to collaborate with China’s
censorship. It is as shameful as Trump’s wall, only this time it is an
invisible wall online — the great firewall.”

Google left [the Chinese market](https://googleblog.blogspot.com/2010/03/new-
approach-to-china-update.html) in 2010, citing human rights concerns. But
[since August 2018](https://globalvoices.org/2018/08/03/if-google-goes-back-
to-china-it-will-be-on-the-governments-terms-what-will-that-mean-for-human-
rights/), [leaked internal
documents](https://theintercept.com/2018/08/01/google-china-search-engine-
censorship/), [audio recordings](https://theintercept.com/2018/09/14/google-
china-prototype-links-searches-to-phone-numbers/), and sources from inside the
company have indicated that Google is preparing to launch a search engine
tailor-made for China. Code-named “Dragonfly”, the search engine would
automatically identify and censor websites like Facebook, Twitter, Wikipedia,
BBC, Global Voices and many others that are currently blocked in China, and
remove search results that government officials deem sensitive.

Google CEO Sundar Pichai [said on October
16](https://www.hongkongfp.com/2018/10/16/google-ceo-sundar-pichai-says-
important-explore-china-project-amid-criticism-censorship/) that “it was
important to explore” the possibility of running a search engine in China,
marking the first time that Google executives confirmed the project’s
existence, despite multiple leaks. Pichai said the project was able to serve
over 99 percent of search queries and still comply with Chinese censorship
laws.

![](https://globalvoices.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/10/badiucao-google-
hat-5.jpg)

Badiucao's ‘Make Wall Great Again’ red cap.

Commenting on the company's plans, the artist said:

> When Google left the Chinese market years ago, a lot people [applauded] its
> principle of defending free speech. But now, with the Dragonfly program and
> its CEO defending the program, it only left deep disappointment and fear of
> the consequences of this super [corporation’s] submission to a brutal
> regime.

Badiucao first created the caps as part of a cartoon, with the cap's wearer
bearing a distinct resemblance to Sundar Pichai. He later had the cap made
into physical merchandise. He said he also tried to interview Google employees
about the project, but most declined to comment and would not accept the caps.
However, he said he spoke to some Chinese employees at Google who appeared to
support the censored search engine. He added:

> I hope [Pichai] will receive the message. If Google wants to help China or
> Chinese people, it should help us to fight and defeat the censorship system
> instead of becoming a part of it.

As for the message on his cap, Badiucao said he decided on “Make Wall Great
Again” because of its double reference: first to China’s censorship system,
nicknamed the great firewall, as well as to Trump’s slogan.

> For me the Trump cap is the crown of shame… Giving something similar to
> Google is the best ironic thing I can do in the USA.

HKFP has reached out to Google for comment.

