[![](https://advox.globalvoices.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/05/christian-
wiediger-606395-unsplash-800x533.jpg)](https://unsplash.com/photos/GWkioAj5aB4)

Photo by Christian Wiediger on Unsplash. Free to use.

#### The Advox Netizen Report offers an international snapshot of challenges,
victories, and emerging trends in internet rights around the world.

In a concerning development for the future of encrypted mobile apps, Iran and
Russia blocked the messaging service Telegram within weeks of each other in
April.

A Moscow court [announced the
ban](https://advox.globalvoices.org/2018/04/16/as-russian-court-announces-
telegram-ban-users-stand-defiant-amused-and-worried/) on April 13 after
Telegram’s CEO repeatedly refused to comply with demands to give law
enforcement agents access to the app’s encryption keys.

But instituting the ban was [easier said than
done](https://advox.globalvoices.org/2018/04/19/netizen-report-russia-is-
blocking-millions-of-ip-addresses-all-because-of-the-telegram-ipocalypse/).
After Roskomnadzor, the country’s federal media regulator, ordered Russian
ISPs to make Telegram’s IP addresses unavailable to users, the company
switched to cloud back-up services.

Roskomnadzor then began banning millions of IP addresses in the attempt to
shut down the service — incidentally blocking business sites and other
communications platforms including Viber, Slack, and Evernote.

Later that month, the Iranian judiciary [issued an
order](https://advox.globalvoices.org/2018/04/25/the-chilling-effect-of-
officials-discussing-telegrams-imminent-ban-in-iran/) to block Telegram,
asking ISPs to ensure it is inaccessible even when using circumvention tools.

Authorities cited national security in their decision to ban the app, which
had been temporarily censored during anti-government protests in December 2017
and January 2018.

Since the order went into effect, Iranians have also reported that they’ve
experienced the throttling of encrypted traffic and problems when trying to
access other platforms like the Apple App store and WhatsApp.

It’s not the first time a country has made Telegram unavailable.
[Pakistan](https://digitalrightsfoundation.pk/statement-drf-expresses-
concerns-over-the-ban-on-the-messaging-app-telegram-in-pakistan/) instituted a
block on Telegram across all telecommunications networks in November 2017
following an order by the Pakistan Telecommunication Authority.

The agency has not yet provided a clear reason for the ban, though [some have
speculated](https://www.techjuice.pk/telegram-remains-banned-in-pakistan/) it
may be linked to Telegram’s encryption, which company CEO Pavel Durov said he
refuses to compromise.

And Indonesia briefly
[blocked](https://www.aljazeera.com/news/2017/08/indonesia-lift-ban-telegram-
app-170801114221832.html) access to the messaging service in 2017 over
concerns that it was being used to spread “terrorist propaganda.” In response,
Durov promised at the time to [take swifter
action](https://www.dawn.com/news/1345698) to shut down public channels
containing “terrorist-related content.”

### **New ownership bodes poorly for Cambodia’s last independent news site**

Concerns are high over the editorial independence of Cambodia’s Phnom Penh
Post after it was [sold to a Malaysian public relations
executive](https://advox.globalvoices.org/2018/05/09/cambodias-last-
independent-news-site-sold-to-pr-firm-that-worked-for-the-ruling-party/).
Editor-in-chief Kay Kimsong was fired after he refused to remove an article
about links between the new owner’s PR firm and Cambodian Prime Minister Hun
Sen. Following Kimsong’s termination, several editors and staff reporters also
resigned in protest.

### **Media freedom advocates say Israel is targeting Palestinian
journalists**

Since protests in Gaza began on March 30, journalists on the scene have come
under fire by Israeli soldiers. Two Palestinian reporters, Yasser Murtaja and
Ahmed Abu Hussein, were killed, despite wearing gear that clearly identified
them as press. Photojournalist Yaser Qudeih was shot in the stomach and
remains in serious condition. Several others have been injured, [hit with live
ammunition, rubber bullets, or chemical
gas.](http://www.madacenter.org/report.php?lang=2&id=1787&category_id=6&year=2018)
Reporters Without Borders has [asked](https://rsf.org/en/news/rsf-asks-icc-
investigate-israeli-sniper-fire-palestinian-journalists) the International
Criminal Court to investigate.

### **Uzbekistan no longer has any journalists behind bars**

In a move celebrated by human rights defenders, Uzbekistan released Bobomurod
Abdulloev and Hayot Nasriddinov, two journalists detained in late 2017 for
“anti-constitutional activities.” For the first time in the last two decades,
there are [no journalists imprisoned in
Uzbekistan](https://advox.globalvoices.org/2018/05/09/uzbekistan-releases-its-
last-detained-journalists/), once known as one of the world’s most despotic
regimes.

### **Anti-Putin protesters complain of widespread network disruptions**

Activists protesting against Vladimir Putin’s fourth term as Russian president
reported that their mobile phone signals were [intentionally
degraded](https://advox.globalvoices.org/2018/05/07/moscow-activists-say-
telcos-disrupted-mobile-coverage-during-protests-at-order-of-police/) by
telecom operators. Others reported their phone numbers were de-listed on law
enforcement authorities’ request. One of the companies, Beeline, denied de-
listing phone numbers and blamed the disruptions on network overload.

### **Indian filmmaker booked over “derogatory” tweets about prime minister**

Mumbai police [filed a
complaint](https://www.thequint.com/amp/story/news%2Findia%2Fad-filmmaker-ram-
subramanian-fir-filed-derogatory-comment-modi-mothers-day) against filmmaker
Ram Subramanian for tweeting comments that they alleged were derogatory about
Prime Minister Narendra Modi and his mother on Mother’s Day. Subramanian’s
account was then temporarily suspended by Twitter shortly afterward for having
“violated the Twitter Rules.”

### **Facebook reveals details of how it enforces community standards**

For the first time, Facebook published a [transparency
report](https://newsroom.fb.com/news/2018/05/enforcement-numbers/) about how
it deals with content that violates community standards. According to the
report, most of the posts removed by the company in the first three months of
2018 were spam or from fake accounts, while 21 million were taken down for
featuring adult nudity and sexual activity, 3.5 million were scrubbed or given
a warning label for showing violence, and 2.5 million were deleted for
containing hate speech. While the company says it uses automated techniques to
flag nudity and graphic content, the technology “still doesn’t work that well”
for hate speech.

### **Leaked documents explain Instagram’s content moderation policies**

[Documents](https://motherboard.vice.com/en_us/article/59qpbk/leaked-
instagram-content-moderation-guidelines) obtained by Motherboard offer insight
into how Instagram polices content, revealing that the Facebook-owned company
will disable an account if two or more parts of the profile violate the site’s
policies, if over 30 percent of the account’s media violates the site's
policies, or if any part of the profile violates Instagram’s policies on drug
sales, revenge porn, sexual solicitation, suicide and self-injury, or
terrorism. Reviewers are instructed to follow a “progressive review” process
by moving from the username, to the profile bio and picture, media, and
comments.

### **Google employees say tech giant “should not be in the business of war”**

More than 3,100 Google employees [signed a letter
](https://www.nytimes.com/2018/04/04/technology/google-letter-ceo-pentagon-
project.html)in protest of the company’s involvement in Project Maven, a US
Department of Defense-funded initiative to improve drone strike targeting with
artificial intelligence. A second letter signed by more than [700
researchers](https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2018/may/16/google-
business-war-project-maven) urged Google executives to support an
international treaty prohibiting autonomous weapon systems.

### **New Research**

  * [Shining a Light on the Encryption Debate](https://citizenlab.ca/2018/05/shining-light-on-encryption-debate-canadian-field-guide/) – The Citizen Lab

## [**Subscribe to the Netizen Report**](http://eepurl.com/Y-f11)

[Afef Abrougui](https://advox.globalvoices.org/author/afef-abrougui/), [Mahsa
Alimardani](https://advox.globalvoices.org/author/mahsa-alimardani/), [Eduardo
Avila](https://globalvoices.org/author/eduardo-avila/), [Ellery Roberts
Biddle](https://advox.globalvoices.org/author/ellery-roberts-biddle/), [Rezwan
Islam](https://advox.globalvoices.org/author/rezwan/), and[ Sarah Myers
West](https://advox.globalvoices.org/author/sarahbmyers/) contributed to this
report.

