[![](https://es.globalvoices.org/wp-content/uploads/2017/02/Christian-
y-Éver.jpg)](https://kurtural.com/escuelasquecaen/)

Christian Quiñónez and Éver Pereira go to a private university Monday through
Thursday in Vallemí. To get there, they must cross a river in a small boat.
Photo by Nicolás Sáenz, borrowed from the Kurtural website with permission.

_The series[Cows That Fly, Schools That
Crumble](https://globalvoices.org/2016/10/18/paraguay-a-country-where-cows-
fly-while-schools-crumble/),
[published](https://kurtural.com/escuelasquecaen/) by Paraguayan economic and
cultural news site [Kurtural](https://kurtural.com/), explores the ways in
which Paraguay's education system fails students. Below is the latest
installment, written __by Patricia Benítez. It will be republished on Global
Voices in two parts._

Monday through Thursday, between 7 in the morning and 1 in the afternoon,
Christian Quiñónez works as a secretary in the court system in [Puerto
Casado](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Puerto_Casado). The city shows up as La
Victoria on Google Maps, but its real name comes from [Carlos Casado del
Alisal](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Carlos_Casado_del_Alisal), a Spaniard
who, in 1889, became the owner of practically the whole region after buying 5
million hectares of public land; an area larger than Costa Rica, Slovakia,
Switzerland or Belgium.

It was here, near the Brazilian border, where Casado established the first
tannin extraction company in the Americas. Back then, tannin was a coveted
substance, due to its role in the leather-making process. The source of this
powerful natural astringent was found in the bark of the quebracho tree – a
group of species native to South America that in those times covered a
significant portion of the territory acquired by Casado. A territory he
acquired with both Paraguayans and indigenous peoples living inside.

In the first decades of the 20th century, the exploitation of the quebracho
forests helped Puerto Casado to grow like never before. The town even got
electricity before Asunción, the country's capital, thanks to a self-
sufficiency system: the ground sawdust from the quebrachos fed fires to boil
water and produce the electricity that the factory required. The surplus
energy was distributed to the homes in town of high-ranking employees and
foreigners from Argentina, Germany, Hungary and other countries.

The whole town, or at least a large part of it, worked for the company.
According to [Valentina Bonifacio](http://unive.academia.edu/VBonifacio), an
Italian anthropologist who has been studying the town's history for years,
Paraguayans filled the lower ranks of the company's hierarchy. Although they
did not hold leadership roles, they did acquire administrative and accountancy
skills. Below them, at the very lowest level, natives from various ethnic
groups from other parts of the
[region](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Chaco_\(Paraguay\)) (which makes up
part of the Paraguayan Chaco), who had moved to Puerto Casado served as
laborers and factory workers.

Today, the majority of Puerto Casado's 7,000 inhabitants are descendants of
the old company's workers. Among them is Christian Quiñónez, who, when the
clock strikes 3 p.m., prepares to leave his white-walled house with its large
patio. The house is held up with massive columns; trunks of a tree whose wood
is so strong it breaks axes. This is where it gets its name: quebracho,
Spanish for axe-breaker.

Christian grew up under this roof, and he still lives there today, together
with his family. The house is the legacy of his father's labor and a period of
abundance in the land. But, unlike his father, an ex-blacksmith for the old
company, Christian didn't grow up knowing tannin and never watched the trains
run on the railway built by the company in 1927 to move the timber bolts from
forest to factory.

### The journey to university

Today in Puerto Casado, there is neither a public nor a private university.
This means that for Christian, a staff member of the city's court of peace and
a third-year law student, the only hope he has for obtaining a degree is on
the other side of the river, in the city of Vallemí, in Concepción, the next
province over. To get there, he crosses the river four days a week—Monday
through Thursday—along with Éver Pereira, a friend of his since high school.
Both of them attend the Vallemí branch of the María Serrana University, a
private institution founded in 2009 whose degrees are still not accredited by
the [National Agency of Higher Education Evaluation and
Accreditation](http://www.aneaes.gov.py/aneaes/index.php/ct-menu-item-31).

If he had had the option, Christian would have gone to a public university.
“Everyone who wants to be a professional dreams of going to the National
University of Asunción,” he says as though stating the obvious. But in his
experience, dreaming is almost never the same as doing. The public university
closest to his town is the National University of Concepción, located in the
city of the same name, a little more than 200 kilometers away.

The availability of higher education in Paraguay is limited. There are seven
public universities in the entire country, with satellite campuses in a few
cities. Meanwhile, there are 47 private universities with a very high number
of subsidiaries all over the country. [Additionally, the majority of the
population, generally speaking, cannot study in public universities for a
variety of reasons.](https://kurtural.com/universidad-garage/) The tuition
costs are high, and the timetables for some degrees prevent students from
being able to work while they study, something vitally important for those who
need to earn money to support themselves.

[![](https://es.globalvoices.org/wp-
content/uploads/2017/02/Bote.jpg)](https://kurtural.com/escuelasquecaen/)

Crossing in his own boat costs Christian Quiñónez one dollar. The alternative
would be a taking a ferry owned by a private company which costs 15 times more
than public transit would in Asunción. Photograph by Nicolás Sáenz, taken with
permission from the website Kurtural.

On a nice, sunny day, clear skies on the horizon, the trip to Vallemí takes at
least an hour and a half. Even when the weather is favorable, the sheer
immensity of the Paraguay River at its confluence with the Apa River doesn't
make the trip a pleasure cruise. The deafening sound of the boat's motor echos
off the magnificent hills and renders conversation impossible, leaving the
travelers alone with their thoughts, observing the environment that, while
fascinating for a first timer, grows dull once it becomes routine. “We sit
down and with _tovasy,_ _jagua canóaisha_ (serious faces, like dogs in a
canoe) we strike out for Vallemí,” Christian jokes in the Guaraní language.

Éver, an accounting student, has always liked mathematics. He is also the
father of two small children, who he supports through his exhausting job in
the middle of the woods cutting down trees to be turned into posts.

It was in this open-air office, which he has very much enjoyed, where he
decided one day in 2015 to go back to school.

### The shipwreck

Up until June 8, 2016, neither Christian nor Éver had ever been in a wreck.
That day, the air was still, but very cold. As had become their habit, they
crossed the river just like they had been doing since March. This time, they
were accompanied by Éver's 19-year-old brother, Luis, who was also studying at
the university, as well as Ramón Paredes and his son Blásido, neighbors
looking for a lift to Vallemí to buy some spare motorcycle parts. It was not
the first time Paredes, a mechanic, had made the trip with them. Nobody
suspected that it would be the last.

On that chilly, late fall afternoon, the outbound trip went by without hassle.
The return, perhaps due to the extra weight of the motorcycle parts, did not.
Twenty minutes after casting off, terror overcame the crew members. It was
nearly 10 at night when the little boat began to sink, more than six
kilometers off the Vallemí port. Guided by a single flashlight, the five men
tried to empty the water flooding into the boat, but it didn't work well.
Christian's attempt to run the boat aground did not work either, which someone
— Christian doesn't remember who — suggested as they all shouted at each other
desperately. With the motor completely submerged, the only option was to jump
into the darkness. None of them had life jackets.

“I jumped into the water. I couldn't see a thing. I swam a few strokes,
grabbed onto some
_[camalotes](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Eichhornia_crassipes) _(large,
floating water plants) and got myself out of the water,” Christian says,
remembering this fateful moment. But he had not come ashore in Vallemí or in
Puerto Casado. Instead, he found himself on a small island between the two
towns. The Pereira brothers, who had grown up around fishing boats and were
expert swimmers, had made it as well. But there were no signs of Ramón Paredes
or his son Blásido.

Christian and the Pereira brothers shouted their names for a few minutes, but
no one responded. Wet and on the verge of hypothermia, they made their way to
the interior of the island in search of help, and only after half an hour of
walking found a group of fishermen who gave them first aid and helped them
look for their friends. The lifeless body of Blásido was found a few hours
later. The body of his father would be found three days later in a search
carried out by the military.

“We were aware that something like this could happen, but not that it would be
so serious. We boarded the boat with this risk every day. Being on the water
is still a risk. So is life itself, but being on the water is just a little
more dangerous,” Christian says of the accident on that wintry June night that
claimed two of his friends. But this was not the first time studying had
brought tragedy into his life.

_In the[second part](https://globalvoices.org/2017/03/16/going-to-university-
in-paraguay-can-be-a-life-or-death-decision-part-two/) of this series, we can
see more of the difficulties and risks faced by Christian Quiñónez and others
aspiring to follow through and finish a university degree._

