Last week, Hungary celebrated the 164th anniversary of the [1848
Revolution](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hungarian_Revolution_of_1848). On
March 15, 2012, the opposition elected a rapper as the ‘alternative president’
– while the prime minister compared the country to a frog jumping out of a pot
of hot water at the very last moment – and a group of far-right protesters
broke into the office of the International Monetary Fund. On March 16, a
techno party was held at Budapest's Heroes’ Square. On March 17, new members
of the Hungarian National Guard took their oath at the same location.

Before the national holiday of March 15, the Hungarian media devoted some
coverage to the news of the Polish and French supporters coming to attend the
demonstrations. Véleményvezér blog
[posted](http://velemenyvezer.blog.hu/2012/03/13/marcius_15_koszonjuk_nem_kerunk_importtuntetoket)
[hu] about this with the title, “March 15: thanks but we don't want to import
protesters!”:

> […] It looks like the Hungarian national holiday's commemorations will turn
> into real international events. Gazeta Polska, a right-wing weekly, reports
> under the title of “A Long Voyage to Hungary” that several thousands Poles
> are traveling to Hungary to rally for Viktor Orbán. French left-wing
> intellectuals have published a public invitation that says it's a cause of
> conscience to come to Hungary and attend the Milla protest against the
> ‘nationalist’ Fidesz government. […]

[![Polish supporters of Jaroslaw Kaczinsky's party, the PiS, have arrived in
Hungary to support the Hungarian PM Viktor Orbán on the National Day. Photo by
DAVID FERENCZY, copyright © Demotix
\(15/03/12\).](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2012/03/1105494-375x250.jpg)](http://www.demotix.com/photo/1105494/pm-
viktor-orban-and-president-pal-schmitt-hungarian-national-day)

Polish supporters of Jaroslaw Kaczinsky's party, the PiS, have arrived in
Hungary to support the Hungarian PM Viktor Orbán on the National Day. Photo by
DAVID FERENCZY, copyright © Demotix (15/03/12).

Guest representatives of the two nations attended the day's two largest
events. The Poles mainly [attended the official governmental
celebrations](https://www.facebook.com/photo.php?v=3173617312244) and the main
event in the afternoon of March 15, where [Prime Minister Viktor Orbán
spoke](http://www.reuters.com/article/2012/03/16/hungary-orban-
idUSL5E8EF7LY20120316). The French guests mainly attended the largest
opposition demonstration together with the citizen movements.

The latter was organized through the Facebook group ‘[One Million for the
Freedom of Press in Hungary](https://www.facebook.com/sajtoszabadsagert)‘ (the
English mirror page is [here](https://www.facebook.com/freepresshun)), often
dubbed as ‘Milla’. Milla started their event also in the afternoon, with a
speech by [Dopeman](https://www.facebook.com/dopemantv), a popular rap
musician, who had successfully re-positioned himself from a popular musician
to an artist expressing the opinion of a strong citizen opposition by
publishing an [explicit song partly using the words of the Hungarian
anthem](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=RTZJmaJO4GQ) [hu].

Starting from the national holiday of October 23, Milla has been running a
highly criticized and incoherent contest for the ‘alternative president’
position – which Dopeman ended up winning. (They [admitted on their
blog](http://nemtetszikarendszer.blog.hu/2012/03/11/hibat_elismerni_szexi)
[hu] that the contest's process was not perfect.)

The rapper cited the many problems of the Hungarian society in [his opening
speech](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=LPNAgTonJeE) [hu] on March 15, also
quoting his own lyrics about the struggles of living in Hungary. Afterwards
representatives of those social groups that have been affected by the current
government's politics – students, journalists, members of the civil society
organizations, etc. – also spoke.

[![A military parade in Budapest on the National Day of Hungary. Photo by
DAVID FERENCZY, copyright © Demotix
\(15/03/12\).](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2012/03/1105435-375x250.jpg)](http://www.demotix.com/photo/1105435/pm-
viktor-orban-and-president-pal-schmitt-hungarian-national-day)

A military parade in Budapest on the National Day of Hungary. Photo by DAVID
FERENCZY, copyright © Demotix (15/03/12).

At the same time, in front of the Hungarian Parliament, PM Orbán compared the
Hungarian society's loan-taking to a frog that feels comfortable in a pot of
slow-boiling water until it's almost too late.

His criticism of the EU was [highlighted by the international
media](https://news.google.com/news/story?gl=us&pz=1&cf=all&ned=us&hl=en&q=orb%C3%A1n+march+15&ncl=dEvSccEUYx08M0Mo9h_E42XRHAVLM),
and here is what Eva Balogh had to say about it on her
[blog](http://esbalogh.typepad.com/hungarianspectrum/2012/03/viktor-
orb%C3%A1ns-speech-declaration-of-war-on-europe.html):

> […] As for the current political atmosphere in Europe Orbán lashed out with
> a few harsh words on that topic. Hungarians understand that “the European
> Union is not an alliance of saints but they cannot watch with folded arms
> while some political and intellectual trend forces an unholy alliance on
> Europe.” […]

By the end of the Milla event, a far-right group ‘[Sixty-Four Counties Youth
Movement](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sixty-Four_Counties_Youth_Movement)‘
(the name refers to the 64 counties that existed before the [Treaty of
Trianon](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Treaty_of_Trianon), a resentful memory
in the Hungarian history) rallied at the same place, generating a conflict
which was solved by the presence of the police. The youth movement then went
to the local office of the International Monetary Fund, where they wanted to
hand in a petition to the representatives of the organization, and when they
were told they could not do it, they lit firecrackers inside the building.
Egyenlítő blog recorded their actions and [shared the video on
YouTube](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=JGeBUmUFQPQ).

March 16 was still about celebrating the 1848 revolution, but some Budapest
youths decided to do it their own way. ‘[More Techno To The
Parliament](https://www.facebook.com/tobbtechnot)‘ is a movement opposed to
the current political situation, but is reacting to it by using some key terms
of political speech. They hold parties on national holidays where they talk
about the ‘techno question’ and promote the idea of a ‘state techno radio’,
not missing out the issue of the need for professional speaker systems and a
DJ in each village. This time the party was at Budapest's Heroes’ Square:

On March 17, also at Heroes’ Square, [some 130 people took an
oath](http://nol.hu/belfold/ujra_gardaavatas_jobbikkal_es_rendorokkel) [hu] as
new members of a paramilitary group called the Hungarian National Guard. The
‘guardists’ have become popular in the past few years in Hungary, but because
of their radical activities the core group,the Hungarian Guard, [had been
banned](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2009/07/23/hungary-the-hungarian-guard-
banned/). Similar groups re-appeared in some villages in northern Hungary
(Global Voices posts about this are
[here](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2011/03/19/hungary-waiting-for-the-
hungarian-guard/) and
[here](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2011/04/24/hungary-for-gyongyospatas-
roma-evacuation-or-an-easter-excursion/)), threatening the Roma population
with their presence.

[This video shows](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=DRULZlOTcPM) the anti-far-
right protesters, too, holding posters saying ‘No Garda’, ‘No Racism’.

