![Image edited by Kevin Rothrock.](https://globalvoices.org/wp-
content/uploads/2016/03/flowerpower-800x450.jpg)

Image edited by Kevin Rothrock.

Visitors to Russia’s new [“I Want Flowers” service](http://xn--
b1aai8acxeoli.xn--p1ai/) are greeted with the following question: “Has it been
a while since your boyfriend gave you flowers?” The website then assures its
audience that it can help. Before explaining how, it offers four explanations
for why boyfriends don’t gift their ladies flowers: he’s too busy, he doesn’t
think it matters to women, he thinks flowers are a waste of money, or he
thinks flowers are only necessary on holidays.

With this brainstorming out of the way, “I Want Flowers” explains what it
does: it doesn’t send anyone flowers, it spams targeted social media accounts
with advertisements about buying flowers for their girlfriends.

“Using modern Internet-advertising tools,” the website says, ”we delicately
remind your boyfriend that it’s been some time since he’s gifted any flowers,
and point out that flowers are important to women.”

Customers can buy three different tiers of “reminders,” ranging from 50 rubles
(about $0.75) to 150 rubles ($2.20), spending more cash for bigger, more
intrusive advertisements. Along with the payment, all the service needs is a
link to the boyfriend’s account on Vkontakte, and the automated romance takes
over from there.

[![“Drop the boyfriend a hint,” reads the main button. Image: I Want Flowers
service website.](https://globalvoices.org/wp-
content/uploads/2016/03/remindhim-800x409.jpg)](http://xn--b1aai8acxeoli.xn--
p1ai/)

“Drop the boyfriend a hint,” reads the main button. Image: I Want Flowers
service website.

According to the news site [TJournal](https://tjournal.ru/24827-v-seti-
poyavilsya-servis-pozvolyaushii-nameknut-molodomu-cheloveku-chto-ego-devushke-
hochetsya-cvetov), the service launched in late January. It’s headed by the
marketing agency AddZIP, which is based in St. Petersburg and Veliky Novgorod.
The agency told TJournal that the website is an entirely commercial project
that’s already generating revenue. AddZIP says it’s planning similar services,
directed at both boyfriends and girlfriends, designed to remind partners to
perform various acts for one another. (There doesn’t appear to be any talk of
appealing to same-sex couples.)

Some Vkontakte users have indeed taken notice of the service, though not all
women are jumping at the chance to spend money on Internet ads meant to
improve their relationships. For example, Elena Ochkova
[wrote](https://vk.com/wall42164708_29815) [post is now hidden] about the “I
Want Flowers” website on her Vkontakte page, “I’d rather just buy myself some
little tulips than waste money on this pointless, demeaning crap. No?”

