[![A Yandex.Money credit card. YouTube
screenshot.](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2014/05/Capture12-800x453.png)](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=YUoMGUOlH20)

A Yandex.Money credit card. YouTube screenshot.

In addition to the steadily increasing censorship of the RuNet and crackdowns
on opposition websites, Russia has now imposed strict regulations on online
payment methods. The new law, due to come into effect later this summer,
limits anonymous online monetary transfers to organisations, and outright bans
anonymous online transfers between individuals.

Although it is ostensibly part of a [package of laws aimed at fighting
terrorism](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2014/01/16/russias-parliament-
prepares-new-anti-terrorist-laws-for-internet/) [Global Voices report], one
cannot but recall that opposition leader Alexey Navalny's extremely successful
2013 mayoral campaign was funded largely through online donations, some of
which were anonymous. Navalny's campaign was [criticized
](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2013/08/13/russias-soviet-assault-on-
navalnys-online-fundraising/)[Global Voices report] for this lack of
transparency at the time, but until now no action was taken by the
authorities.

On Friday, May 23, the offices of Yandex.Money, the popular online payments
system associated with Russia's largest search engine, were [searched by
Russia's Investigative Committee](http://www.interfax.ru/russia/377615),
apparently with regards to campaign fraud accusations against the summer 2013
Moscow mayoral campaign. This is due to the fact that several of Navalny's
supporters donated large sums of money to the campaign as individuals, and
then asked for their Yandex.Money wallets to be replenished through donations.
In this way, ran the thinking, Navalny's campaign wouldn't have to worry about
potential foreign donations, and the like, while obeying the letter of the
law.

Navalny [responded ](http://navalny.com/blog/2014/05/23/post_3596.html)to the
Investigative Committee searches on his blog (which is blocked by order of
Russian Internet regulator Roskomnadzor), claiming that the donation process
was transparent â€” all funds received by those involved in the scheme in excess
of 1 million rubles (the legal donation limit) were transferred over to
Navalny's political party, which then used it for the campaign. Navalny also
wrote that this new criminal investigation is part of an overall campaign to
limit the possibility of crowd-funding political actions and elections. The
ability to collect millions of rubles from thousands of supporters, and the
lack of control over the political process that is inherent in that, scares
the Kremlin.

