As Bangladesh celebrates its Independence Day on 26th March, the Bangla
blogosphere is inundated with posts reliving the horrific [Operation
Searchlight](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Operation_Searchlight) that was
launched by the Pakistan Army on 25th March 1971, in a desperate attempt to
stamp out the Bengali Nationalist movement.

[Abul Bahar](http://www.somewhereinblog.net/blog/bahar007blog/28782257) brings
to life that fateful the fateful night of 25 March, 1971 with the following
words:

> Suddenly Dhaka came to a standstill. There was complete silence all around.
> The country was shivering under the heavy tread of the evil forces. The
> earth was soaked red and the fragrant smell of the hasnahana flower was
> overpowered with the stench of blood.

Bloggers today are vociferous about the estimated 3million people that had
been exterminated during 1971. The [Bangladesh Genocide
Archive](http://www.genocidebangladesh.org) has been painstakingly put
together by some of the leading Bangla bloggers, to make netizens aware of the
extent of atrocities committed on the Bengali population by the Pakistan Army
with help from the
[Razakars](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Razakars_%28Bangladesh%29). Another
new website to be launched by bloggers is [Bangladesh
1971](http://www.bangladesh1971.net/), which aims at connecting today’s
generation of Bangladeshis with the life and times of the people who fought
for the country’s Independence, while simultaneously keeping up the pressure
on the Nation’s conscience to bring the perpetrators to book.

Why is it necessary today to relive the freedom struggle? Perhaps to avoid the
‘Hollywoodization of the liberation war’ as
[Rasel](http://www.sachalayatan.com/raselonly/13618) puts it. Also,
[Shamim](http://www.somewhereinblog.net/blog/tanmoytahsanblog/28780333)
clarifies why after so many years, it still remains imperative to bring the
war criminals to trial. He says it is not out of a feeling of retribution but
rather as a future deterrent that this ‘bringing to book’ is necessary. It is
also a necessary step towards ensuring justice and a closure for the victims
and their surviving families.

[Rabab](http://www.sachalayatan.com/trenchantplayer/13628) writes that on this
day of Independence, he feels no inspiration but only a sense of hurt and
dejection when he sees all around him the corruption and victory of the
separatist forces, the dreams of a united and economically strong Bangladesh
fading into despair. Blogger
[Shobjanta](http://www.sachalayatan.com/eeeboy/13615) seems to share in this
hurt. However, the feeling evaporates once he listens closely to the [National
Anthem](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Amar_Shonar_Bangla) “Amar Shonar Bangla,
ami tomay bhalobashi” (my precious Bengal, I love you).

