[![George Clooney handcuffed at rally for peace in Sudan.
](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-content/uploads/2012/03/clooney-
arrested-375x271.jpg)](http://www.flickr.com/photos/enoughproject/6841795748/)

George Clooney handcuffed. Photo by Sasha Lezhnev, shared by ENOUGH project on
Flickr (CC-BY-NC-ND)

The United States has [arrested](http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/world-us-
canada-17403715) actor George Clooney and his father Nick at a protest outside
the Sudanese Embassy in Washington DC. Arab Twitter users register their
protest on their arrest on Twitter.

The protest was organised to to draw attention to a looming humanitarian
crisis in the Nuba mountains areas, on the border between Sudan and South
Sudan. Sudanese President Omar Al Bashir is accused of blocking food and aid
from reaching the region.

The Big Pharaoh, from Egypt, tweets [Ar]:

اكتب على حيطة الزنزانه حبس كلونى عار وخيانة

[@TheBigPharaoh:](https://twitter.com/#!/TheBigPharaoh/status/180676393867280385)
Write on the prison walls, arresting Clooney is shameful and treacherous

Syrian Save Our Syria reacts:

> [@freeppl](https://twitter.com/#!/freeppl/status/180675365855965185): Actor
> Clooney arrested outside Sudanese Embassy..I am glad someone from hollywood
> now know how reality action feels like

![](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-content/uploads/2012/03/Screen-
shot-2012-03-16-at-6.44.16-PM.png)

#FreeClooney trending worldwide on Twitter

  
Tunisian Tounsia Hourra (Free Tunisian) jokes [Ar]:

أنادي بجبهة شعبية لتحرير جورج كلوني , يا نساء العالم اتحدن جورج مقبوض عليه في
واشنطن ‎‬

[@tonsiahourra](https://twitter.com/#!/tounsiahourra/status/180675715321176064):
I call for a popular movement to free George Clooney. Women of the world
unite. George Clooney has been arrested in Washington DC.

Malek, from Egypt, adds [Ar]:

كله الا كلوني يا ولاد الكلب … ماعندكم مايكل مور

[@MaLek](https://twitter.com/#!/MaLek/status/180673723685289984): Anyone other
than Clooney, you sons of dogs! You have Michael Moore [whom you can arrest]

Egyptian Marwan Qoutb chimes in [Ar]:

جورج كلوني مش بلطجي , الحرية لجورج كلوني

[@Qoutb](https://twitter.com/#!/Qoutb/status/180670570927636483): George
Clooney is not a thug! Freedom for George Clooney

While Egyptian Alyaa Gad jokes:

> [@AlyaaGad](https://twitter.com/#!/AlyaaGad/status/180676602596823040):
> Don't #FreeClooney. Can't stand him. lol

And J Berry draws parallels to some of the atrocities committed against Arab
protesters during the Arab revolutions saying [Ar}:

كلوني و قبضوا عليه .. ناقص ايه ؟ .. يخرموا عين توم كروز !! يسحلوا كيم
كارديشيان !! يكشفوا عذرية باميلا انديرسون !

[@moneloky](https://twitter.com/#!/moneloky/status/180674880478515201):
Clooney has been arrested… what's left for them to do? Pop Tom Cruise's eyes?
Pull Kim Kardashian across the street? Or check Pamela Anderson for her
virginity?

For other reactions on Clooney's arrest, check out the Twitter hash tag
[#FreeClooney](https://twitter.com/#!/search/freeclooney), which is now
trending worldwide

