**_This post is part of our special coverage[Europe in
Crisis](https://globalvoicesonline.org/specialcoverage/europe-in-crisis/)._**

Just a few days after the [brutal police crackdown at the Luis Vives Institute
of Secondary Education in
Valencia](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2012/02/19/spain-police-violence-
against-students-in-valencia/), students have again been the target of
beatings, pushing and violence from the police at a pacific protest in which
they were, precisely, demonstrating against police violence. This time, [the
crackdown started on the
afternoon](http://pinchiputo.tumblr.com/post/17953667143/actuacion-policial-
valencia) with unexpected force.

The chief of Valencia Police himself has referred to the protesters as “[the
enemy](http://www.publico.es/423065/la-policia-aduce-que-se-limito-a-
responder-al-enemigo)“, even though they are youngsters from 12 to 17 years,
all secondary school students.

Reactions from #15M social movements were quick to [denounce the crackdowns
against minors](http://www.acampadavalencia.net/2012/02/20/denunciamos-las-
cargas-policiales-contra-menores-del-lunes-20-de-febrero/#comments) and ask
for an investigation and for the [political and police leaders to immediately
stop](http://actuable.es/peticiones/pide-cese-paula-sanchez-leon-como-
delegada-del-gobierno) the repression of minors and the participants of the
pacific gatherings.

About 400 university students have locked themselves up in the Universidad de
Valencia (Valencia University) as a form of protest. And in anticipation to
the police crackdown inside the University, the Dean has denied access to the
forces of “law and order” that attempted to dissolve the protest, basing her
decision on the principle of university autonomy.

To directly keep updated on the news, follow the hashtag
[#PrimaveraValenciana](https://twitter.com/#!/search?q=%23PrimaveraValenciana
"#PrimaveraValenciana") [es].

**_This post is part of our special coverage[Europe in
Crisis](https://globalvoicesonline.org/specialcoverage/europe-in-crisis/)._**

