“How Many Policemen Does It Take to Arrest a Homeless Person?” was the title
of a [post on October 11,
2011](http://magyarinfo.blog.hu/2011/10/11/hany_rendor_kell_egy_hajlektalan_lesittelesehez)
[hu] on Kettős Mérce blog [Double Standard], which included a
[video](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=UsmSiC7veP8&feature=player_embedded)
showing eight policemen arresting a homeless man in the District VIII of
Budapest.

In fact, it was Attila Kopiás, blogging under the name of
[KA_Steve](http://rocknpol.blog.hu/2011/10/12/ne_varj_masokra_csinalj_valamit_most)
[hu], who pretended to be homeless and, with the help of Kettős Mérce's
bloggers, recorded what happened after they had called the police and reported
that there was a homeless person on a bench of a District VIII square.

The issue generated a huge debate after the mayor of the district, through a
referendum, had banned homeless people from public spaces in September.
Bloggers followed the cases happening in District VIII and published [an
order](http://magyarinfo.blog.hu/2011/10/05/a_szegenyeknek_is_vannak_jogaik)
[hu] prosecuting a homeless man for “sitting on the stone with some of his
fellows.”

The regulation literally forbids “staying in public space as a lifestyle.”
Attila Kopiás told the bloggers of Kettős Mérce in an interview that he tried
not to lie to the police, so when they asked him if he stayed at a public
place “as a lifestyle” he replied that “it had happened before that I slept in
a public place”.

He told Kettős Mérce:

> […] I didn't have any elaborate strategy, I was simply disgusted by the fact
> that people are not punished for their acts but for their condition. The
> idea came from me feeling an urge to do something against this unfair
> system. In addition to this, my mind was not able to accept that in 2011, in
> Hungary, it can happen that one can be arrested and handcuffed for notorious
> sitting/lying on a bench. […] I reckoned with nobody taking care of me, and
> I simply wanted to see what really happens. […]

Commenting on the action, KA_Steve raised the question of what differentiates
someone having a picninc at a public space from a homeless. Reflecting this, a
version of ‘Picnic in May’ – originally a painting by [a 19th-century
Hungarian artist](http://www.mng.hu/en/collections/allando/176/591) – started
to circulate on Facebook,
[published](http://prolidepp.tumblr.com/post/11353286073/ez-most-egy-ilyen-
politikai-ize-nem-is-ertem) originally by the Tumblr user Prolidepp.

KA_Steve called for action [on his
blog](http://rocknpol.blog.hu/2011/10/12/ne_varj_masokra_csinalj_valamit_most)
[hu], sharing legal ways to protest the regulation that punishes those who
live on the streets, move a trash can or engage in begging.

Attila wrote this [hu] on Kettős Mérce:

> […] But I want them [the homeless] to know there are people who stand up for
> them. The way we all want someone to stand up for us when we are in trouble.

