**_This post is part of our special coverage[#Occupy
Worldwide](https://globalvoicesonline.org/specialcoverage/occupy-
worldwide/)._**

One month since the initial occupation of the financial district of New York
City, Wall Street, collective actions in the city have continued to diversify
while people have taken over new public spaces. Activists and organizations
from the
[Bronx](http://www.norwoodnews.org/id=4064&story=%E2%80%98occupy%E2%80%99-movement-
takes-up-residence-in-the-bronx/),[Brooklyn](http://www.occupybrooklyn.org/),
[Washington Heigths](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=N7Gmm5eGXJs), [East
Harlem](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=0TCNngd7auM) and
[Jamaica](http://blogs.villagevoice.com/runninscared/2011/10/occupy_the_hood.php)
neighborhoods of Queens that – for a long time – have resisted political,
economic and social inequalities, are now also expressing their indignation.

Malik Rashan, one of the founders of the movement to integrate communities,
[Occupy the Hood](http://www.facebook.com/OccupyTheHood?ref=ts), explains that
he noticed the absence of African-American and Latinos at Liberty Plaza and
decided to summon them. The movement Occupy the Hood
_(_[@OccupyTheHood](http://twitter.com/#!/OccupyTheHood) _)_ has expanded to
various cities in the USA in an attempt to expand the presence of people from
different races and nationalities in the occupy movement.

Here is an interview with Malik posted by Eliad19606 to YouTube:

[People of Color
/#OccupyWallStreet](http://pococcupywallstreet.tumblr.com/calltoPOC) was
created for the same reason. This group is looking to “develop critical
conscience about the movement” and to continue integrating the most affected
people during the economic crisis.

In their website, there is an archive of their past actions and minutes of
their meetings. One minute, for example, announces their alliance with the
dance group Mexica, who performed at Wall Street on October 10th, in tribute
to mother earth. You can read two articles on this event, “Dispatches from
Indigenous People’s Day Part
[1](http://infrontandcenter.wordpress.com/2011/10/12/dispatches-from-
indigenous-peoples-day-part-1/) &
[2](http://http://infrontandcenter.wordpress.com/2011/10/12/dispatches-from-
indigenous-people-part-2/)“, by Thanu Yakupitiyage and Saara Azadi,
respectively.

In this video published by Thanuska on YouTube, there is a fragment of the
ceremony:

Clearly, while protests continue on the streets, newspapers, the Internet, on
TV, and in our minds, people will be motivated to ask how can they honor their
multiple histories, identities and struggles and – at the same time- fight
together for a deep transformation of society. In fact, there has been an
interesting debate on the use of the concept “occupy” to define this movement.
People from different races, ethnicities and cultures have been discussing and
reflecting on the meaning of “occupation” in their lives and contexts. It is a
debate that evidences the challenge of building an inclusive and horizontal
movement.

At it is well explained by activist and writer [Harsha Walia in her
letter](http://infrontandcenter.wordpress.com/2011/10/16/letter-to-the-occupy-
together-movement/ ) to Occupy Together movement:

> Embracing this plurality and having an open heart to potentially
> uncomfortable truths about systemic oppression beyond the ‘evil corporations
> and greedy banks’ will strengthen this movement. Ignoring the hierarchies of
> power between us does not make them magically disappear. It actually does
> the opposite – it entrenches those inequalities.

To read the full text, visit the blog [in front and center: critical voices of
the 99%](http://infrontandcenter.wordpress.com/about/). This digital platform
presents voices of marginalized communities that are essential in the
discussions that are taking place presently.

**_This post is part of our special coverage[#Occupy
Worldwide](https://globalvoicesonline.org/specialcoverage/occupy-
worldwide/)._**

