**_This post is part of our special coverage[Global Development
2011](https://globalvoicesonline.org/specialcoverage/un-millennium-
development-goals-in-2011/)._**

The[ International Museum of Women](http://imow.org/home/index)‘s online
exhibit on women and the economy, features slideshows, podcasts, videos and
essays on women from countries such as Sudan, Denmark, Philippines, USA, Costa
Rica, Mexico, Argentina and how they view issues such as poverty, business,
family, rights, money and much more.

_[Economica](http://imow.org/economica/index)_ , IMOW's online interactive
exhibit sets out to explore women's contribution in the global economy.
_[Picturing Power and
Potential](http://www.imow.org/economica/picturingpowerandpotential/)_ , was a
juried photography exhibit showing different ways in which women participate
in the economy and are agents of change.

For example, the exhibit's Community Choice Award winner was [Brenda Paik
Suno](http://www.imow.org/economica/projects/story?key=4160), a third
generation Korean-American who took pictures of a Jeju Granny of the Sea, a
woman who is part of the tradition of female divers of the Jeju Islands who
have harvested the sea for generations.

[![Female divers of the Jeju Islands. Image by Brenda Paik
Suno.](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2011/05/BrendaPaikSunoo-200x300.jpg)](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2011/05/BrendaPaikSunoo.jpg)

Female divers of the Jeju Islands. Image by Brenda Paik Suno.

_[Focusing on Latin America](http://imow.org/economica/latinamerica/) _brings
us perspectives on how the crisis affected the women in three different
countries of the region: Mexico, Costa Rica and Argentina, and how they are
facing the new challenges brought by the rising participation of their
countries in the world's economy.

Version in [Spanish here](http://youtu.be/Wj8uhJZXQfY).

_[Young Women Speaking the
Economy](http://imow.org/economica/youngwomenspeaking/) _asked women from __
four different countries to send in their thoughts on diverse economic issues.

[Ally Zeifman](http://imow.org/economica/projects/story?key=6124) tackled the
subject of relative poverty through an audio interview. First she started by
asking people in Denmark to answer if they thought there was poverty in
Denmark, and then by interviewing a woman who believes that she is one of the
invisible Danish poor. On [her project
page](http://imow.org/economica/projects/story?key=6124), you can hear the
audio and read an introduction to the subject and see a picture slideshow with
quotes from the interview illustrating what being poor in Denmark looks like.

Some of the quotes such as “I graduated from the university, but I am
unemployed”, “My son really wanted to play football, but I cannot afford all
the shoes and equipment, so in the end i decided it's better to just get some
food on the table” and “I know I am not poor like in Africa, but I have to say
no a lot” might ring bells with anyone who has been in a tight financial
situation.

[Valeene Salanga](http://imow.org/economica/projects/story?key=6128) of
Philippines reflects on how even a college education is no guarantee to a
brighter future, when getting that first job seems to be a path riddled with
obstacles for which she, a recent graduate, felt unprepared:

In [this video](http://youtu.be/ZaSNw98iyH8), uploaded on the [IMOW's YouTube
channel](http://www.youtube.com/user/intlmuseumofwomen), we learn about the
hardships a certain group of women are facing in India. These are the women
whose husbands have committed suicide due to agricultural debt and now they
are left alone to fend for themselves, pay of debt and provide for their
families in a society where they were already at an economic disadvantage:

There is much more to see, read and listen in
_[Economica](http://imow.org/economica/index), _and women can also
[participate and submit ](http://imow.org/economica/stories/submissions)their
own creative work focusing on the economy.

**_This post is part of our special coverage[Global Development
2011](https://globalvoicesonline.org/specialcoverage/un-millennium-
development-goals-in-2011/)._**

