Egyptian cyber activist Wael Ghonim, who shot to international fame after
being arrested at the beginning of the Egyptian revolution, is facing
criticism from the very same Egyptians who earlier championed for his release.

In a series of tweets today, Ghonim urged the protesters to put their
country's economic prosperity ahead of their revolutionary agenda.

He [wrote](https://twitter.com/#!/Ghonim/status/70749296454156288) [ar]:

المجلس بيخسر من رصيده مع الثوار لكن لازم نلاحظ إن الثوار بيخسروا من رصيدهم مع
الأغلبية الصامتة اللي بدأت تتضايق من تبعات الأزمة الاقتصادية

The Council is losing its legitimacy with the revolutionaries but we need to
realise that the revolutionaries are losing their credibility with the silent
majority, who are starting to suffer from the economic side effects of the
crisis

[![Egyptian blogger Wael Ghonim. Image by Flickr user yamaha_gangsta \(CC BY
2.0\).](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-content/uploads/2011/05/Wael-
Ghonim-181x300.jpg)](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2011/05/18/egypt-i-
unfollowed-ghonim-because/wael-ghonim-2/)

Egyptian blogger Wael Ghonim. Image by Flickr user yamaha_gangsta (CC BY 2.0).

In a follow up tweet, he
[explained](https://twitter.com/#!/Ghonim/status/70753045801209856) [ar]:

مفيش جدال على إن مصر كانت على أعتاب أزمة اقتصادية بغض النظر عن الثورة .. لكن
مينفعش ننكر آثار الثورة الجانبية على العمالة وخاصة الفقيرة

We all agree that Egypt was at the threshold of an economic crisis, whether
the revolution happened or not .. but we still cannot deny the adverse side
effects the revolution has had on the work force, particularly its poor
segments

He further [added](https://twitter.com/#!/Ghonim/status/70753259677159424)
[ar]:

عمال اليوميات (ودول مش أقل من مليون مصري) والناس اللي شغالة في قطاعات السياحة
والتنمية العقارية وغيرهم كتير مش بيسمعونا بنتكلم في قضيتهم

Workers who earn a daily wage (and those number not less than 1 million
Egyptians) and people employed in tourism and real estate development, and
many more, never hear us speaking about their concerns

Ghonim [concludes](https://twitter.com/#!/Ghonim/status/70754203852742656)
[ar]:

الاقتصاد لازم يتحط على أولويات الثوار لأنه صمام أمان لضمان استمرار الثورة
وتطهير مصر من الفساد

Economy should be the priority for the revolutionaries, because it is the
safety valve which will guarantee the continuation of the revolution and the
cleansing of Egypt from corruption

This series of tweets was faced with a backlash from Egyptian tweeps, and
others from the region, who criticised Ghonim of not speaking up against the
Army Council and its actions against protesters, despite the influence he
carries, with his almost 156,000 followers on Twitter. The tweets can be found
under the hashtag [#UnfollowedGhonimBecause  
](https://twitter.com/#!/search?q=%23UnfollowedGhonimBecause)

Ghonim shone after his release from prison, when it was discovered that he was
the administrator of the ‘We Are All Khaled Saeed’ page on Facebook, which
sparked the Egyptian revolution on January 25, 2011. Saeed is a young Egyptian
man from Alexandria who was killed after being beaten up by the police. Like
Mohammed Bou Azizi of Sidi Bouzid in Tunisia, his murder angered Egyptians and
made them rally around the ‘We Are All Khaled Saeed’ group, which along with
others, started to plot for a Tunisia-like revolution in Egypt.

Comments on Ghonim's stance came from Egypt and beyond.

Nourhan Ramadan
[says](https://twitter.com/#!/Nourhan_Ramadan/status/70842571676598273) [ar]:

#UnfollowedGhonimBecause هيفضل وائل محترم و انا مش بقول انه مش محترم .. بس هو
اولوياته غير اولوياتنا انا مش عارفه هو مش حاسس بالوضع ولا ايه

Wael will remain respectable and I am not saying he isn't. But his priorities
are different from ours. I don't know if he realises the situation we are on
or not

Arab Spring [adds](https://twitter.com/#!/ZakYahya/status/70816550109712384):

> #UnfollowedGhonimBecause he seems to care about ‘economy’ more human rights.
> He doesn't know economy prospers when u have human rights

And Karem Said
[explains](https://twitter.com/#!/karemsaid/status/70816431771619328):

> i #UnfollowedGhonimBecause he has no vision for a revolutionary
> transformation of politics and the economy beyond promoting ICTs #egypt

Karima Momen
[continues](https://twitter.com/#!/Mankousha/status/70791856358821888):

> I #UnfollowedGhonimBecause when i heard about the book. u've been the whole
> time imprisoned. what do u actually have to say in it!

Amira Khalil is more direct in her criticism and
[says](https://twitter.com/#!/amirakhalil46/status/70796532315721728):

> i #UnfollowedGhonimBecause he's a sell-out. Falling for the “economic
> stability” manipulative tactic!! Forgetting what #Jan25 is all about.

Mohammed Al Daaysi from Bahrain
[tweets](https://twitter.com/#!/MDaaysi/status/70796449142669313):

> #UnfollowedGhonimBecause he became power/fame drunk – really unattractive
> considering he was just PART of the egyptian revolution.

Kuwaiti Mona Kareem
[adds](https://twitter.com/#!/monakareem/status/70812684697862144):

> nothing personal about #UnfollowedGhonimBecause and no one saying
> unpatriotic. It's just he's famous & he should speak against the army

And Israeli Elizabeth Tsurkov
[continues](https://twitter.com/#!/Elizrael/status/70795963656192000):

> I #UnfollowedGhonimBecause his tweets are incredibly corny & foster myths
> like “revolution 2.0″. Still have respect for what the guy did.

Others did not share this point of view.

M_Ibrahim_M
[notes](https://twitter.com/#!/M_Ibrahim_M/status/70844730380005376):

I have not #UnfollowedGhonimBecause هو راجل محترم و فيه حاقدين كتير

I have not unfollowed Ghonim because he is a respectable man and there are a
lot of envious people

Sherif El Saadani
[adds](https://twitter.com/#!/ssaadani/status/70843392355074048) [ar]:

لا يصح أن ننعت أحد بالتخاذل أوالتواطؤ لمجرد قناعته بغيرما يعتقده
الاغلبية.التحضر اني أحمي حقك في رأيك المخالف لرأيي #unfollowedghonimbecause

It is not right to call someone careless or conspiring because he is convinced
with something the majority are not convinced with. Civilisation is that I
protect your right to have an opinion which is different from mine.

And Haisam Yehia
[concludes](https://twitter.com/#!/jarelkamar/statuses/70820307027505152):

> I find it so ironic that @Ghonim tweet of the day is: “It takes 20 years to
> build a reputation & 5 minutes to ruin it”. Today of all days.

Chirpinator shares a more comprehensive list of Twitter reactions
[here](http://chirpstory.com/li/1483).

