The role of social networking site Facebook in
[facilitating](http://voices.washingtonpost.com/posttech/2011/02/the_circuit_feb_15_2011.html)
protest actions has been affirmed in the Tunisia and Egypt uprisings;
governments in many countries, including
[China](http://www.huffingtonpost.com/2011/04/07/ai-weiwei-investigated-
suspected-economic-crimes_n_845932.html), are wary of the political activities
of their citizens on Facebook. But in Cambodia, Facebook is not yet considered
a threat by the government.

Politicians led by Prime Minister [Hun
Sen](http://www.facebook.com/?ref=home#!/pages/Samdech-Hun-Sen-Cambodian-
Prime-Minister/111975152184324) (who has been in power since 1985) have
created their own Facebook pages where they interact with Cambodian citizens
and netizens.

There is however, a newer and interesting Facebook trend in the country:
Cambodians are creating songs about Facebook. For example, ‘[Facebook ends
love](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=BkEuLZB7DVU)‘, uploaded to YouTube by
user [lotusresortandspa](http://www.youtube.com/user/lotusresortandspa) on
March 11, 2011:

The pop music industry has produced a number of songs related to Facebook.
[_Cambodia Khmer Magazine_](http://cambodiakhmer.com/cambodian-facebook-
song/), though claiming not to be a fan of the material, is impressed that
many Cambodians are thoroughly enjoying these ‘Facebook songs.’

Below are examples of the songs uploaded onto YouTube (all in Khmer):

  * [‘Facebook disturbs my love’](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=6pEqdUlzZCg&feature=related)
  * [‘Facebook ends love’](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=BkEuLZB7DVU)
  * [‘Start having Facebook, love exists’](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=pf4F2YEfUn4&feature=related)
  * [‘Facebook friend! My girlfriend kicked me out’](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=i9g_8lvpWKI&feature=related)
  * [‘Tear drop when surfing on Facebook’](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=8Kby0xv2JN0&feature=related)
  * [‘Tear sent via Facebook’](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Bj0ldvJsJpk&feature=related)
  * [‘Suffered by Facebook’](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=0OT_TUbqqtQ&feature=related)
  * [‘A night with Facebook’](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=F-wAuwCfaMY&feature=related)
  * [‘Facebook waits love’](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=U9SffbuYD-o&feature=related)

[_Khmerbird_](http://khmerbird.com/) is surprised about the emergence of these
songs, but expressed his agreement with some of the songs that blamed Facebook
for the breakdown of relationships. In his article, ‘[The effect of Facebook
has been written in Cambodian
songs,](http://khmerbird.com/entertainment/music/effect-of-facebook-have-been-
written-in-cambodian-song.html)‘ he writes:

> It seems a bit surprise when I hear the song but it might be true somehow.

_Khmerbird_ cites a song by Khemarak Sereymon, titled [‘Facebook disturbs my
love’](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=6pEqdUlzZCg&feature=related) and
explains its message:

> He stated in the song that since there’s Facebook, his girlfriend seems not
> to take care of him like before. He felt like he is totally abandoned. His
> girlfriend spent her time to connect with different people via Facebook.
> This of course could cause a serious effect in the relationship.

In Cambodia, there are only about 250,000 Facebook users accounting for 1.73%
penetration rate in the country, according to
[_socialbakers.com_](http://www.socialbakers.com/facebook-
statistics/?interval=last-week#chart-intervals). But with politicians
endorsing Facebook and artists creating songs about the popular social
networking site, Facebook will definitely attract more users in Cambodia.

