The idea of auctions as a fundraising tool is not a new one in the charity
world — everything from paintings to exclusive trips are sold this way.
Sometimes, there is even a market for people: dinners with celebrities and
business-breakfasts are sold under the hammer, too. Warren Buffet, for
example, has auctioned lunch dates with himself since 2000. The most recent
one (in 2011) sold in an open auction on eBay for [2,626,411
dollars](http://lenta.ru/news/2011/06/12/buffet/) [ru]. But that kind of fun
is not available to everyone.

_[Ma Sense](http://maesens.by/)_ [ru], a Belarusian project, aims to introduce
to philanthropy two new categories of people that, as a rule, have not been
active in charity: young members of online social networks and fans of dating
sites. In a nutshell, _Ma Sense_ is a hybrid of a charity auction-house and a
dating site. Anyone interested may come and register as a ‘lot,’ proposing to
go get a coffee or take a trip to the cinema with the highest bidder. Whoever
likes the proposal can place a bid and buy the ‘lot.’ Four months into its
existence, 11,200 people have registered with the project, raising more than
450,000 rubles (14,000 U.S. dollars). Apart from the average date, there are
also business meetings, and even more ‘exclusive lots’ (with celebrities and
businessmen), now appearing on the site.

[![](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-content/uploads/2012/05/Screen-
shot-2012-05-29-at-12.43.44-AM-375x273.png)](http://goodwillion.ru/)

Screenshot from goodwillion.ru, 29 May 2012.

The charitable foundation _[Nastenka](http://www.nastenka.ru/)_ [ru], which
has been helping children with cancer for the last ten years, has become the
new partner of the date auction site _[GoodWillion](http://masense.ru/)_ [ru].
All proceeds raised from the sale of a date go to the treatment trust fund for
Diana Cherbadzhi and Andrewshi Onikienko.

One of the most tempting [auction lots](http://masense.ru/lot/7576) [ru]
belongs to Pasha Kiriloff, a _Radio Maximum_ discjockey who sells meetings
with himself, as well as time in the _Radio Maximum_ studio during his evening
show, ‘Pashkov and Kiriloff.’

**What do you get out of it?**

People get to know one another, have a good time, and enjoy pleasant surprises
(and any company that wants to present gifts to the the project's participants
is able to become a partner) — all while helping sick children.

It makes sense for everyone!

[Original](http://te-st.ru/2012/04/20/makes_sense_nastenka/)

