Taiwan blogosphere recently resumed the hot discussion about bloggers’
advertising / marketing post — but the topic goes hotter this time.

[richyli](http://www.richyli.com/blog/ "http://www.richyli.com/blog/")[zh]
started the debate with a blog post “[How to insert product ads more
effectively via bloggers / journalists : using
Junket](http://www.richyli.com/blog/2008/07/junket.html
"http://www.richyli.com/blog/2008/07/junket.html")“[zh]. He highlights Weblogs
Inc.'s rejection of “junket” practice. (Junkets are free trips that PR firms
and the companies they represent provide to journalists in the hopes of
getting favorable reviews for their products.) However, he wonders if such
“noble” stand really works as junket is really attractive and effective:

> 其次，拿人手短乃人之常情，人家招待你去外地旅遊，現在很多招待部落客的 Junket
> 甚至還有「車馬費」，你能不寫嗎？通常答應參加的同時就已經默認稿子會被處理了。如果參加了 Junket
> 之後不乖乖寫稿，除非真的夠屌，夠大牌，媒體夠響亮，否則下次絕對不讓你參加。這對於旅遊線的記者沒什麼，但一般線的記者，或者部落客，「損失」就很大
> 了。還有，人家的好意，你再怎麼「平衡」，老實說都是騙自己的。

It is quite normal that you would say something good about a person if that
person is good to you. When they offer you an opportunity to go traveling for
free, or even give you subsidy in the junket package, it is highly unlikely
that you won't blog about it. Let alone if you promise to go for the trip they
treat, you also tacitly promise to write something. Suppose if you join a
junket and don't blog for them, they will not let you join again unless you
are a A-list blogger or famous enough. This may be not so attractive for
travel journalists. But for other journalists or bloggers, it is too good an
opportunity to be missed. Besides, when people treat you nicely, even though
you keep reminding yourself to be “balanced”, eventually you are just cheating
yourself.

[DearJohn](http://www.dearjohn.idv.tw/ "http://www.dearjohn.idv.tw/")[zh]
holds a different opinion. In a post entitled “[Other bloggers’ articles are
advertorials, is it your business at
all?](http://www.dearjohn.idv.tw/index.php?pl=1630
"http://www.dearjohn.idv.tw/index.php?pl=1630")“, he argues that the ethical
regulations of bloggers should not be the same as that of journalists.
Moreover, readers do not pay for reading blog posts. In this sense, bloggers
have the right to select what they want to say and write. It does not matter
whether the posts are PR ads as long as the contents are compelling:

>
> 我的結論就是，有沒有利用部落格來寫廣告文章、部落客有沒有做置入性行銷，根本就一點也不是重點！重點是那個人的文章寫的夠不夠精采，具不具可讀性？如果一個人的文章寫的很爛、照片拍的很醜，就算勉強想做行銷，大概也根本沒人想上來看吧？換句話說，有人就算是接受了招待、拿了稿酬寫了某篇產品試用推薦文，如果寫的很棒，大家都很愛看，那又如何？根本就沒什麼騙不騙的事，一個願打、一個願挨，不曉得旁邊的人在不爽什麼？

My conclusion is that it is not the point at all whether bloggers take
advantage of the blog to write advertisement or whether blogs insert product
promotion! What really matters is whether these blog posts are well written
and compelling. If the articles are poorly written or the photos are poorly
taken, no one will be interested in reading them, even though the blogger
tries hard to promote the product, right? In other words, even if some
bloggers accept the treat or the remuneration for writing a product ads, as
long as the article is well written and received, what's wrong with that?
There is no fraud at all. If the writer and reader are fine with it, why
others should be mad at it?

For the debates regarding sharing / marketing and disclosure / conceal,
[Portnoy](http://www.bigsound.org/portnoy/ "http://www.bigsound.org/portnoy/")
used [a two-dimensional
diagram](http://www.bigsound.org/portnoy/weblog/004478.html
"http://www.bigsound.org/portnoy/weblog/004478.html")[zh] to “disclose” his
position, with one axis from “complete disclosure” to “complete conceal”, and
another one from “personal sharing” to “pure marketing”. Then,
[wenli](http://sdkfz251.blogspot.com/ "http://sdkfz251.blogspot.com/") writes
a similar post entitled “[Dear friends of blogger, I am
here](http://sdkfz251.blogspot.com/2008/07/dear-blogger.html
"http://sdkfz251.blogspot.com/2008/07/dear-blogger.html")“[zh] to mark his
position.

Apart from the discussions about the issue, some debates are directing to
individuals. In the post “[So many coincidences in the
world](http://blog.pixnet.net/SpinalCord/post/19827148
"http://blog.pixnet.net/SpinalCord/post/19827148")[zh],” _SpinalCord_ mentions
that [Tina](http://tw.myblog.yahoo.com/yutinwang-1982/
"http://tw.myblog.yahoo.com/yutinwang-1982/")[zh] is not just a blogger who
“shares good things with her good friends,” but also [a Yahoo! auction seller
with more than 1,000
ratings](http://tw.user.bid.yahoo.com/tw/show/rating?userID=yutin0530&u=%3ayutin0530
"http://tw.user.bid.yahoo.com/tw/show/rating?userID=yutin0530&u=%3ayutin0530")[zh].
In
[response](http://tw.myblog.yahoo.com/yutinwang-1982/article?mid=58507&prev=52887&next=58483&page=1&sc=1
"http://tw.myblog.yahoo.com/yutinwang-1982/article?mid=58507&prev=52887&next=58483&page=1&sc=1")[zh],
Tina and her supporters emphasize the point is, “the blogger shares good
things and orders them for us.”

_SpinalCord_ also talks about another famous blogger in Taiwan in [another
post](http://blog.pixnet.net/SpinalCord/post/19887556
"http://blog.pixnet.net/SpinalCord/post/19887556")[zh]. He questions it's
really unusual that [amarylliss](http://blog.pixnet.net/amarylliss
"http://blog.pixnet.net/amarylliss")[zh] has [so many bottles of yoghourt
drink](http://blog.pixnet.net/amarylliss/post/19789688
"http://blog.pixnet.net/amarylliss/post/19789688")[zh] in her fridge. He
assumes the post is advertising, not sharing.
[TSUBASA](http://www.tsubasa.com.tw/mt/ "http://www.tsubasa.com.tw/mt/")[zh],
her husband, [writes a post](http://www.tsubasa.com.tw/mt/archives/004953.html
"http://www.tsubasa.com.tw/mt/archives/004953.html")[zh] with a list of
grocery stock at home, including 15 kgs of flour, two boxes of coffee, and
dozens of red wine.

In the end，[Fred](http://fred.ipod.to/blog/ "http://fred.ipod.to/blog/")
shares the article, _[why I am not good at writing advertising
posts?](http://fred.ipod.to/blog/?post;1603
"http://fred.ipod.to/blog/?post;1603")_ [zh]:

>
> 也許是同樣的事情、同樣的邀請和「利用」，但這樣的重視讓我覺得自己能以專業評論者的身分寫文章，而不是背負著人情或利益壓力寫宣傳文的部落客；對於這家公關公司和他們的客戶而言，我相信多少也得到了一些金錢買不到的東西。

It may be the same situation, same invitation and the same ”utilization”, but
the respect they showed made me feel that I can write articles as a
professional commentator, not as a blogger who writes advertising articles
under the pressure of returning a favor or making a profit. As for this PR
firm and its clients, I think they got something that money cannot buy.

This post is co-translated from Chinese by GV chinese team, the author would
like to thank the help from Leonard, H. Y., and abstract.

