As mentioned in [the previous
post](https://www.globalvoicesonline.org/2007/03/11/taiwan-bloggers-act-on-
saving-lo-sheng-sanatorium/ "Global Voices Online » Taiwan: bloggers act on
saving Lo-Sheng Sanatorium"), discussions and actions on saving Lo-Sheng
Sanatorium have widely spread in Taiwan blogosphere. Now the whole event has
also attracted attention from mainstream media, the public, and politicians.

**Bloggers’ actions:**

In addition to discussions and collaboration over their blogs, several
bloggers decided to take actions in the real world.

![](http://img.photobucket.com/albums/v280/kovis/lo-sheng0317/IMG_3879-1.jpg)

_“Happy Life in Losheng”, photographed by kovis._

Several bloggers walked into the sanatorium, [taking a lot of
pictures](http://www.kovis.idv.tw/wp/?p=157 "小窩部落格 » 【走進樂生】心之居處是吾家") for those
have never been in the sanatorium. As [kovis](http://www.kovis.idv.tw/wp/
"小窩部落格 » 我走‧我拍‧我想‧我寫") said:

> 家和房子是不一樣的  
>  家是心情上的認同  
>  而房子只不過是個容身之處  
>  所以說「家」是心之居處

Home is different from a house. Home is belonging to your heart, while a house
is just a place for your body. That's why “home” is called as the place where
your heart lives.

To clearify if the reservation of 90% of the area is applicable,
[nooorman](http://nooorman.blogspot.com/index.html "沒有人要去英國︰關心樂生2號平台") asked
his friend who works in the Rapid Transit System, and compared all approaches
proposed by the [Department of Rapid Transit System
(DoRT)](http://english.taipei.gov.tw/dorts/ "Department of Rapid Transit
System \(DoRT\)"), Dr. [Ke-Chiang Liu
(劉可強)](http://www.bp.ntu.edu.tw/Faculties/2-5.htm "劉可強"), and Dr. [Chao-Chin
Yu
(喻肇青)](http://www.arch.cycu.edu.tw/modules.php?op=modload&name=info&file=index&area=3&html=yu_cc.htm
"中原大學建築學系"). By illustrating the design (with the help of
[wenli](http://sdkfz251.blogspot.com/ "廢業青年日記")‘s [hand-made
schematics](http://sdkfz251.blogspot.com/2007/03/90.html "圖說樂生院：90%，懶得面對的真相"))
and discussing pros and cons of each plan, he explained the proposals one by
one to his readers. He also decided to turn his blog into a platform
specializing in technical issues of Lo-sheng reservation.

In the mean time, [HOW](http://www.howsdesign.com/blog/ "HOW’s SketchBook")
visited Dr. Liu, [asked his
opinion](http://www.howsdesign.com/blog/2007/03/13/272
"保存樂生90%方案的進一步說明：採訪劉可強老師") about the controversies among those proposals, and
put voice records and a sketch of the interview on his blog. He concluded that
there is still space for negotiation:

>
> 捷運局的方案與文建會的方案基本上是有討論空間的。而捷運局保存40%的方案根本上並沒有真的保存到樂生療養院，也不願意和文件會的案子進行工程技術上的討論。這個案子是很有機會找出一個具體可行的解決方案。

Basically, there is room for discussions between proposals from the
[DoRTS](http://english.taipei.gov.tw/dorts/
"http://english.taipei.gov.tw/dorts/") and the [Council for Cultural
Affairs](http://english.cca.gov.tw/mp.asp?mp=1 "Council for Cultural
Affairs"). The problem is, the 40% reservation proposal from the DoRTS does
not really reserve the major part of the Lo-sheng sanatorium, not mentioning
the fact that the DoRTS isn't willing to discuss technique details of
engineering with the CCA. Otherwise, it is possible to find out an applicable
solution for both sides.

[![部落客集資救樂生的成果](http://farm1.static.flickr.com/161/426156563_080cbd9a56.jpg)](http://www.flickr.com/photos/pipperl/426156563/
"Photo Sharing")

[The bloggers then initiated a joint action and got more 200,000
(TWD)](https://www.globalvoicesonline.org/2007/03/16/taiwan-200-bloggers-
joint-action/ "Taiwan: 200 bloggers joint action") to advertise their appeals
on Appledaily news. The ad revealed information of 90% reservation, and
emphasized that Hsinchuang city may also benefit from the reservation. Another
joint action was also organized to [make
T-shirts](http://www.hemidemi.com/event/info/4 "樂生 T-shirt：將「保留樂生」的小小夢想穿在身上")
with words “Saving Lo-sheng” on them. Benefits from selling these T-shirts
will be donated to the campaign.

[Macdog created a service called “Losheng
Walker”](https://www.globalvoicesonline.org/2007/04/04/taiwan-losheng-walker/
"Taiwan: Losheng Walker"), allowing users to recommend resturants and places
near the sanatorium. Benla [called for a
meeting](http://blog.roodo.com/benla/archives/2861399.html "部落客可以在社運作什麼
--從樂生事件中「假記者」被逮補談起") to talk about “what bloggers can do in the social
campaign”. Representatives of “Youth Lo-Sheng Union” and other organizations,
together with several bloggers and those interested in this topic, shared
their thoughts for this issue.

![](http://bp1.blogger.com/_qSFzENPfnjU/RgvQsZk7f4I/AAAAAAAAAa8/LCD9XYRXn-8/s320/GD.JPG)

_The photograph is cited from Yao's article._

[Yao](http://jinyaolin.blogspot.com/index.html "堯@部落格") contacted the owner of
the [Gundam-like](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gundam "Gundam - Wikipedia")
lantern that attracted many discussions during the [Yuan-Hsiao
Festival](https://www.globalvoicesonline.org/2007/03/12/taiwan-yuan-hsiao-
festival-carry-a-lantern-play-firecrackers-and-worship-deities/ "Taiwan: Yuan-
Hsiao Festival: carry a lantern, play firecrackers, and worship deities").
With permission from the owner , Yao and several bloggers [placed the lantern
inside the sanatorium](http://jinyaolin.blogspot.com/2007/03/blog-post_29.html
"\[樂生\]正義無敵‧鋼彈護樂生") – “Gundam is protecting the Lo-Sheng”.

**Public attention:**

The [Taiwan Public Television Service online](http://eng.pts.org.tw/index.php
"Taiwan Public Television Service online") produced a
[program](http://www.pts.org.tw/php2/program/citizen/citizenProgram.php?serials=1174060800
"公共電視台_公民眾意院") by inviting members of the campaign, local residents and
representatives from Hsinchuang city, specialists of the rapid transit system,
and representatives from the administrations (including the DoRTS, the CCA,
the Department of Health, the Transportation Bureau, etc.). In this show, the
specialist He-Yuan Cyue (闕河淵), who is also the ex-vice director of the DoRTS,
revealed that the technique issue can be resolved if the DoRTS re-evaluates
their regulations. From his points of view, the schedule may even not be
delayed once the 90% reservation proposal is applied. His words were then
[quoted and discussed](http://nooorman.blogspot.com/2007/03/2_18.html
"回應與挑戰\(2\) 闕河淵先生的訪談") in the blogosphere.

Many other organization and individuals also [cosigned for the
reservation](http://www.pcschool.idv.tw/savelosheng/ "Save Lo Sheng"),
together with the calls from more than 180 scholars (they posted an ad on
Chinatimes, too), [medical
workers](http://medforlosheng.blogspot.com/2007/03/blog-post_17.html
"醫界聲援樂生原地保留連署行動"), [media students](http://www.wretch.cc/blog/comyouth
"樂生傳播青年"), and culturologists. The [IDEA](http://www.idealeprosydignity.org/
"IDEA Leprosy and Human Rights"), which is an organization under the UN, also
[epressed their great
concern](http://www.taipeitimes.com/News/taiwan/archives/2007/04/04/2003355181
"Taipei Times - archives") for this issue.

On March 21, two of the possible candidates for president 2008, Mr. [Xi-Kun
You
(游錫堃)](http://zh.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=%E6%B8%B8%E9%8C%AB%E5%A0%83&variant=zh-
tw "游錫堃 - Wikipedia") and Mr. [Frank Chang-ting Hsieh
(謝長廷)](http://zh.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=%E8%AC%9D%E9%95%B7%E5%BB%B7&variant=zh-
tw "謝長廷 - Wikipedia") claimed that they would support the reservation of the
sanatorium. Two days later, the Executive Yuan Premier Mr. [Tseng-Chang Su
(蘇貞昌)](http://zh.wikipedia.org/wiki/%E8%98%87%E8%B2%9E%E6%98%8C "蘇貞昌 -
Wikipedia") also [asked the Public Construction
Commission](http://news.yam.com/bcc/politics/200703/20070323058728.html
"蘇揆樂生態度轉彎？ 工程會：重新尋找平衡點") to negotiate with the DoRTS and try to find a way to
reserve the sanatorium as much as possible. So far, they have been working on
it.

**Debates and Different voices:**

There are opposite opinions for the “Saving Lo-sheng campaign”. MOTCT [posted
his comments](http://www.ptt.cc/bbs/Lo-Sheng/M.1174225536.A.ED2.html "批踢踢實業坊 -
看板"), explaining that the regulations cannot be modified, otherwise safety of
the train might be compromised.

[Subing](http://blog.roodo.com/subing "酥餅的BLOG") expressed [his
observation](http://blog.roodo.com/subing/archives/2891873.html
"樂生樂生，多少罪惡假汝之名而行之") on the so-called “Lo-sheng compaign”:

>
> 支持樂生保留的人獨缺我那群長期從事社運的朋友們，他們毫無例外的告訴我，樂生保留訴求的正當性不足，很難說服社會，作為一個專業的社會運動者，他們必須選擇戰場，他們甚至質疑現在還選擇樂生當作戰場的人，要不就是判斷出問題，不然就是別有用心。

Those who support the reservation may not include my friends who have been
devoted on the social campaign for a long time. My friends told me
unexceptionally that the calls for reservation are not legit enough to
convince the public. As the professional social activists, they have to choose
battleground. They even doubted that the people who choose the Lo-sheng issue
as the battleground, either misjudge or have other purpose.

In March 31, Mr. [Hsi-Wei Chou
(周錫瑋)](http://zh.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=%E5%91%A8%E9%8C%AB%E7%91%8B&variant=zh-
tw "周錫瑋 - Wikipedia"), as the Taipei County Commissioner (where the sanatorium
is), [participated a
demonstration](http://www.taipeitimes.com/News/taiwan/archives/2007/04/01/2003354766
"Taipei Times - archives") entitled “We want MRT for our survival!”. The
demonstration was staged by the local representatives of Hsinchuang. They
opposed the reservation of Lo-sheng sanatorium because it may lead to the
construction of the Mass Rapid Transportation (MRT) behind schedule. Mr. Chou
stood on the float, asking the Executive Yuan [do not postpone the schedule of
the demolition](http://blog.serv.idv.tw/2007/04/02/644/ "周錫瑋的嗆聲"):

> 各位鄉親，我們捷運為了樂生，我們願意等，但是已經等了三年，我們還要再等一年以上，再等下去嗎? (群眾大喊) 不要~~~~

Chou: “Dear citizens!! For the losheng sanatorium, we are willing to wait. BUT
we have waited for three years!! Are we going to wait for another year? For
any longer?” Crowd: ” No~~~~”

He also told the crowd that he will proceed the demolition on April 16, unless
the Executive Yuan asks the government to postpone via formal documents.

In the Legislative Yuan, Mr. [Chia-Fu Tsai
(蔡家福)](http://www.ly.gov.tw/ly/en/03_leg/03_leg_02.jsp?ItemNO=EN130000&stage=6&lgno=00193
"The Legislative Yuan Rebpulic of China") , the legislator who was elected
from Hsinchuang city, [obstructed the legislating
procedure](http://www.taipeitimes.com/News/taiwan/archives/2007/04/05/2003355340
"Taipei Times - archives") of “Hansen's Disease Compensation Act”. Although
the draft of the act have been proposed and negotiated during the past two
years, Mr. Tsai, together with the other two ligislators, boycotted the cross-
party negotiations right after they arrived. This will cause the efforts via
the legislation facing a dead end before April 16.

**The upcoming events:**

On April 15, the day before the scheduled deadline for demolition, another
demonstration will be [held by more than 50
organizations](http://www.wretch.cc/blog/happylosheng&article_id=6935665 "保留樂生
最後戰役 415樂生大遊行") in front of the [Chiang Kai-Shek Memorial
Hall](https://www.globalvoicesonline.org/2007/03/15/taiwan-the-future-of-
chiang-kai-shek-memorial-hall/ "The future of Chiang Kai-Shek Memorial Hall").
Protesters will voice their support for the reservation, and ask the
government to cancel the order of demolition and protect human rights of the
leprosy ex-patients.

**Last minute update:**

In April 12, the Executive Yuan Premier
[announced](http://tw.news.yahoo.com/article/url/d/a/070411/5/cr6a.html
"蘇揆接見樂生院代表 承諾朝90%保留案努力") that the demolition of the Losheng Sanatorium will be
postponed and the reservation of 90% is going to be considered. Later the
Taipei County Commissioner confirmed the announcement and claimed that he will
follow the Executive Yuan's decision. But he also insisted that the Executive
Yuan has to take the full responsibility if the construction is delayed.

_The author would like to thank the[GV Chinese translation
team](https://zh.globalvoicesonline.org/hant/
"https://zh.globalvoicesonline.org/hant/") for the help with preparation for
this article._

