The Philippines is a top choice of United States-based companies for business
process outsourcing or BPO.

A call center job is preferred employment of many young Filipino graduates
since it offers good financial incentives. The [BPO industry in the
Philippines
](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Business_process_outsourcing_in_the_Philippines)generated
$1.12 billion in revenues and employed more than 112,000 people last year.

Because of lower labor costs in the country, US-based companies relocate
business functions such as customer care, medical transcription, software
development and animation.

Now, another job that is “outsourced” in the Philippines is private security
operator or independent contractor ( read: mercenaries) in Iraq and
Afghanistan.

A Manila broadsheet [reported](http://www.malaya.com.ph/jun13/news1.htm) that
more than 300 Filipinos have been employed by a private company to guard US
State department and military personnel, facilities and base camps in Iraq.

Triple Canopy, Dynacorp and Blackwater were named as the companies that hired
the Filipino mercenaries.

A Filipino journalist
[revealed](http://www.manilatimes.net/national/2006/june/28/yehey/opinion/20060628opi2.html)
that Blackwater acquired 25 acres in a former US military base in the
Philippines to conduct survival military training.

Filipino journalist and blogger [Ellen
Tordesillas](http://www.ellentordesillas.com/?p=343) was able to interview a
Filipino mercenary about the difficulties and even rewards of being an armed
worker in Iraq securing US military facilities.

Filipino mercenaries must first travel to Dubai, Jordan or Kuwait since the
Philippines has banned the deployment of workers in Iraq after a Filipino
worker was kidnapped in a US military camp by Iraqi insurgents in 2004.

[Senator Aquilino Pimentel
](http://www.nenepimentel.org/news/20060625_Iraq.asp)warned of security
backlash over the deployment of Filipino mercenaries fighting on the side of
US troops. He said:

> “The additional problem is that these mercenaries might make the country and
> our embassies and trade missions vulnerable to counter-attack by those being
> attacked by the mercenaries in Iraq.”

Many Filipinos are eager to work in war-torn Iraq since they can earn at least
$1,700 a month. A minimum wage worker in the Philippines receives only $116 a
month.

