As the [Rakhat Aliyev affair](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Rakhat_Aliyev)
spins, and the ex-ambassador and former presidential son-in-law continues
blackmailing the country’s authorities with discrediting materials, including
publication of illegal taps of telephone conversations between the top
officials, a number of websites have been recently
[blocked](http://www.rferl.org/featuresarticle/2007/11/44A2465A-E56C-4E95-9700-2E2DC681E54B.html)
in Kazakhstan. “No explanations on the reasons of filtering were provided”,
_mantrov_ [reports](http://mantrovkz.livejournal.com/35508.html).

A Kazakhstan-born blogger now living in Australia, _weathercock_ , says he has
a “pathologic reaction to restriction of free speech on the post-Soviet space,
especially in Kazakhstan” and undertakes a commitment to repost all of the
censored [kompromats](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Kompromat) “just for their
exotic nature”. “Where would you find another country, where the top-ranking
officials speak with each other in a way the American gangsters did in 1930s”,
he [notes](http://weathercock.livejournal.com/123477.html).

Meanwhile, the blockade of disfavored websites was not a final stage of the
government’s excessively neurotic reaction – last week, several independent
newspapers were raided by police and regulatory bodies in an apparent attempt
to hinder their publication. As a result, some of them were denied printing
facilities and failed to appear in print. Shortly after that, chief editors of
these newspapers had a meeting with Minister of Information Yertysbayev.

As _sarimov_ informs, the meeting was meant to mitigate the conflict – the
authorities are not interested in another scandal with the press, but they are
even less interested in broadcast of discrediting materials about the
government and president. “The conditions that had been set by the minister
are simple: stop publications of Aliyev’s leaks and there will not be any
problems with print-houses. A deadly dichotomy”, _sarimov_
[concludes](http://sarimov.livejournal.com/120542.html).

However, the newspapers seemingly did not have a choice, but to accept the
conditions – _mahno-mactep_ [calls](http://maxho-
mactep.livejournal.com/30834.html) the deal “an obscene peace treaty”.
Meanwhile, _Joshua Foust_
[offers](http://www.registan.net/index.php/2007/11/01/dangerous-professions-
journalism-in-central-asia-the-caucasus/) an overview of the recent alarming
developments in the sphere of mass media in the region of Central Asia,
listing the cases of journalists being murdered over the past few years.

[All links, except the last one, lead to the posts in Russian]

