John Kelly and Bruce Etling share their study about Iran's blogosphere and
election on the _[internet and democracy
blog](http://blogs.law.harvard.edu/idblog/)_. Internet and democracy is the
team blog for the internet and democracy project in Berkman Center for
Internet & Society in Harvard.

![slide1a](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2009/06/slide1a.jpg)

Based on our monitoring of the Iranian blogosphere on election eve, it looks
like Mousavi has broader support in the online blog community than
Ahmadinejad. (For a broader understanding of the different attentive clusters
in Iran check out our new onl[ine interactive Iran blogosphere
map](http://cyber.law.harvard.edu/publications/2008/Mapping_Irans_Online_Public/interactive_blogosphere_map)).
The below maps show who is linking to websites associated with the candidates.
It’s pretty interesting to see the contrast between Ahmadinejad
[emtedadmehr.com](http://emtedadmehr.com/)), whose links are very concentrated
in the Conservative Politics cluster, and Mousavi
[mirhussein.com](http://mirhussein.com/)), whose links come from all over the
map, not just the reformist politics group.

![slide2b](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2009/06/slide2b.jpg)

![slide3c](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2009/06/slide3c.jpg)

We are particularly struck by how many links come from the poetry cluster,
which rarely links to political sites. Also, Moussavi has even more links from
the CyberShi’a than Ahmadinejad.

This online interest doesn’t necessarily translate to the offline world, but
it may indicate a broader level of excitement about Mousavi in the electorate,
particularly among those outside his expected base of supporters, which could
ultimately lead to higher voter turn out for Mousavi.

As Hamid Tehrani [wrote
](http://blogs.law.harvard.edu/idblog/2009/06/09/youtube-shows-different-
faces-of-iranian-election/)earlier this week, YouTube is being used a lot by
Iranians in this election. Here is one of the YouTube videos most linked to by
reformists.

And here is the video most linked to by conservatives, which Hamid pointed to
earlier in the week as an example of conservatives trying to discredit
Khatami, who has supported Mousavi since he dropped out of the race himself.

Iran experts caution against trying to predict election winners Iran (because
we’ve been surprised before), and we’d caution against predicting a Mousavi
win just on this analysis, but it is certainly interesting to see the larger
level of online support for Mousavi on the eve of the election. We’ll have to
leave it to the voters at this point.

Some additional data and analysis on Iran’s election eve blogosphere is posted
on Morningside Analytics [Shifting the Debate
blog](http://www.shiftingthedebate.com/). You can also catch an interview and
find all of [Hamid Tehrani’s
posts](http://www.pbs.org/wnet/wideangle/uncategorized/inspired-by-obama-
irans-presidential-candidates-go-online-to-campaign/4973/) on the Internet and
the Iranian election on the PBS Web site.

Check back here next week for the big release of our Arabic blogosphere paper
and accompanying event at USIP.

