![neda3](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2009/06/neda3.jpg)The Iranian protest movement now has a
symbol and a face:
[Neda](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Neda_\(Iranian_protester\)#cite_note-
CNNRally-4).

Neda was an Iranian woman who was shot dead by Basij militia on Saturday
during a protest of thousands against the [Iranian presidential
election](https://globalvoicesonline.org/specialcoverage/iranian-
election-2009/) results that declared [Mahmoud
Ahmadinejad](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mahmoud_Ahmadinejad) president. Her
death [was captured
](http://www.reuters.com/article/worldNews/idUKTRE55M39820090623)on video by
bystanders and uploaded to the internet. She died with her eyes wide open, and
her last moments transcended citizen media to mainstream media, reaching
millions of people.

A website has been dedicated to Neda, named _[We are all
Neda](http://weareallneda.com/)_. A quote on the homepage says, “We did not
throw rocks at them, we cried ‘we want freedom’. They shot us.” Both Iranians
and non-Iranians are leaving [comments](http://weareallneda.com/#comment-) in
memory of Neda on the site. So far, there are nearly 3,500 and the numbers are
growing rapidly.

![neda2](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-content/uploads/2009/06/neda2.bmp)

> _Mahyar says:_ “I wish my eyes could have learned from yours to be open
> bravely!!!”
>
> _Reza says_ : “Your open eyes taught me a lesson: ‘Don’t close your eyes to
> injustice'”
>
> _Mojtaba says_ : “Neda will never die, everyone of us could one day be a
> Neda”
>
> _Vida says_ : “Your light is shining the way towards freedom. Thank you.”

Iranian blogger _Andisheh_ [writes
](http://andiisheh.blogspot.com/2009/06/blog-post_6382.html)that Iranian
national television are trying to blame ‘anti-revolutionaries’ for killing
Neda. The blogger adds that if anybody had any doubts that Iranian television
lies, these doubts can now be put to rest.

Here is a video film on Neda and the Iranian protest movement ( **Warning:
some images are very graphic** )

In a very short time, Neda's death became an international news story and
people responded in different ways to show their sympathy.

Here is a song for Neda from an American singer on YouTube, _[Johnny Maudlin
(Johnny99)](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ivdKvsW2kmM)_ (Persian subtitles
were added by another user):

… and another by traveling American musician,
[Roothub](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=CqF7186UJx8):

Blogger _Asad Ali Mohamadi_ ,
[writes](http://mebaily.com/2009/06/post_288.html) [fa] that his neighbours in
Copenhagen, Denmark, are asking him about Neda, and that as soon as you turn
on the television and internet you see news about Iran and Neda. “All talk
about my Iran, our Iran. All talk about my Neda, our Neda,” he says.

_Cecilia Morales_[ tweeted](http://twitter.com/gregory35/statuses/2297973375),
“We were not born to be slaves. We are human beings, God Bless you Neda, God
Bless the Iranian people who want to live in freedom.”

_Atefeh Walters_
[tweeted](http://twitter.com/AtefehWalters/statuses/2297957218), “I will fight
for my country always!! I will never forget Neda!!”

_Zannevesht_ , a blogger and journalist[
refers](http://notes.parastood.ir/archives/005114.php) [fa] in her blog to
Neda's death and says courageous Iranian women and girls have been present in
this protest movement.

There were candlelight vigils for Neda in many cities around the world.

From New York:

To Dubai:

