![shooresh](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2009/06/shooresh.jpg) One day after Islamic Republic Leader
Ayatollah Ali Khamenei
[denounced](http://edition.cnn.com/2009/WORLD/meast/06/20/iran.election/index.html)
protests and warned reformist leaders against taking to the streets, thousands
of people demonstrated in Tehran. They were joined by others in several cities
across Iran in ignoring Khamenei's order and voicing their anger against the
[June 12 presidential
election](https://globalvoicesonline.org/specialcoverage/iranian-
election-2009/) results. They clashed with Iranian police who used tear gas
and water cannons to disperse them.  
At least 19 people [were killed
](http://edition.cnn.com/2009/WORLD/meast/06/20/iran.election/index.html)in
Tehran.

Here is a film showing people trying to stop security forces in Tehran:

and a demonstration in Tehran:

**Mousavi: I am ready for Martyrdom**

_Green Vote_ [tweeted ](http://twitter.com/greenvote/status/2253978746)that
Mahmoud Ahmedinejad's main opponent Mir Hussein Mousavi was among protesters
in Inghlab (meaning Revolution) Square, where he announced : “I am ready for
martyrdom”.

_Green Vote_[ adds](http://twitter.com/greenvote/status/2254140949) that
Mousavi Mir Hossein said told the people: “We have learned from our fathers
that the blood of the innocent shall fall upon the guilty.”

_Whoshang_ [tweeted](http://twitter.com/whoshang/status/2254052517) that
Tehran is imploding; that protesters are being hurt/killed and that Mousavi
says he's ready for martyrdom. He added that several embassies were opened to
receive those injured.

_Iranriggedelect_
[tweeted](http://twitter.com/IranRiggedElect/status/2254081388) that protests
seem to have become distributed across the city after police did everything
they could to prevent one large crowd from amassing in one place.

_Tehran Bureau_[ reports](http://twitter.com/TehranBureau/status/2254214278)
that the chanting/slogans were directly aimed at the supreme leader.

_Shooresh_ [provides ](http://shooresh1917.blogspot.com/2009/06/minute-by-
minute-with-revolution.html) a minute by minute report on the protest movement
in Tehran and has published several photos (one is above).

At the same time,
_Iraneema_[tweeted](https://twitter.com/iraneema/status/2254361326) that
[arrested political activists
](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2009/06/19/iran-reformist-and-activist-
bloggers-arrested/)are under pressure.

A video is also available online, showing a protester allegedly being killed
at the hands of security forces. _Global Voices Online_ has the link to the
footage but will not publish it because of its graphic nature.

