**This report was researched, written, and edited by[Alex
Laverty](https://advocacy.globalvoicesonline.org/author/alexlaverty/),[
Weiping Li](https://advocacy.globalvoicesonline.org/author/weiping-li/),[
Renata Avila](https://globalvoicesonline.org/author/renata-avila/), [Hisham
Almiraat](https://globalvoicesonline.org/author/hisham/), [Chan Myae
Khine](https://globalvoicesonline.org/author/mydaydream/),[ Sarah
Myers](https://advocacy.globalvoicesonline.org/author/sarahbmyers/), and**
**** **[Rebecca
MacKinnon](https://advocacy.globalvoicesonline.org/author/rebecca-
mackinnon/).**

The [World Conference on Information
Technology](http://www.itu.int/en/wcit-12/Pages/default.aspx) (WCIT) which
opened in Dubai on Monday, 3 December 2012, is being hailed as ‘[The Battle
for Control of the
Internet](http://www.computing.co.uk/ctg/news/2229094/battle-for-control-of-
the-internet-spills-into-the-open-at-wcit)’, ‘[The Conference to Define the
Future of the Internet](http://memeburn.com/2012/12/wcit-12-the-future-of-the-
internet-could-be-decided-by-a-conference/)’, and ‘[The UN Takeover of the
Internet](http://www.digitaltrends.com/web/united-nations-wcit-itu-internet-
takeover-thing/)’ among other colorful headings. Officially, the meeting of
the International Telecommunication Union (ITU) and the 193 member countries
is to review the current [International Telecommunications
Regulations](http://www.itu.int/en/wcit-12/Pages/itrs.aspx) (ITRs) that
essentially serve as the rules of digital connections and interoperability of
telecommunications and satellite networks. They do not currently cover
Internet protocols, resources, or governance, and there is much controversy
over whether they should.

[![](https://advocacy.globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2012/12/WCIT2.jpg)](http://www.flickr.com/photos/itupictures/8245933679/)

ICANN CEO Fadi Chehade speaks at the opening ceremony at WCIT 2012, courtesy
of Flickr user itupictures (CC BY 2.0)

Experts from [Vint Cerf ](http://edition.cnn.com/2012/11/29/business/opinion-
cerf-google-internet-freedom/index.html)to [Tim Berners-
Lee](http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/technology-20594779) have weighed in on the
decisions that could be made at this week’s conference.
[Google](https://www.google.com/takeaction/), joining forces with [civil
society](http://www.protectinternetfreedom.net/) from [around the
world](http://mybroadband.co.za/news/internet/65848-hands-off-south-africas-
internet.html), has [launched a campaign](http://www.zdnet.com/google-
promotes-take-action-campaign-for-free-open-web-7000007686/) to make their
position clear: the ITU should keep its hands off the Internet. However
Google’s agenda has been
[criticized](http://www.forbes.com/sites/jodywestby/2012/12/04/googles-media-
campaign-against-the-un-slapped-down/) [by ITU
Chief](http://www.thenational.ae/thenationalconversation/industry-
insights/technology/telecoms-union-chief-lashes-out-at-google-during-dubai-
conference) Hamadoun Toure, who said that Google is “abusing its power”.

Two primary concerns among netizens and civil society are that [countries that
deploy heavy-handed censorship and
surveilance](http://www.theatlantic.com/international/archive/2012/12/the-
russian-and-chinese-governments-threat-to-the-internet-as-we-know-it/265782/)
will use the opportunity to define the global rules for the Internet in a way
that favors greater worldwide censorship and surveillance, and that the UN
will propose it [take over the domain name coordination functions of
ICANN](http://techcrunch.com/2012/06/05/is-the-u-n-really-trying-to-take-over-
the-internet-nope/). There is also concern that telecommunications companies
which have lost revenue as people replace international phone calls with email
and voice chat, will try to regain lost revenue by redistributing bandwith
costs to Internet companies – which Internet companies and many users will
stifle innovation and make free social networking services less accessible.

News coverage on this issue has been extensive, however good articles with
background on WCIT 2012 are found in [The New York
Times](http://www.nytimes.com/2012/11/28/technology/dark-warnings-about-
future-of-internet-access.html?_r=0), [Council on Foreign
Relations](http://blogs.cfr.org/patrick/2012/12/04/un-control-of-the-internet-
an-idea-whose-time-will-never-come/),
[Mashable](http://mashable.com/2012/12/03/wcit-explained/), and
[Wired](http://www.wired.com/opinion/2012/12/internet-users-shouldnt-have-to-
pay-the-price-of-an-international-treaty/). Also be sure to check out recent
[coverage of
WCIT](https://advocacy.globalvoicesonline.org/2012/11/07/protecting-the-open-
web-net-activists-unite/) on Global Voices Advocacy, plus a [great
breakdown](https://advocacy.globalvoicesonline.org/2012/09/12/protecting-the-
open-internet-before-the-itu-civil-society-takes-action/) of the issues and
resources by our very own [Ellery
Biddle](https://advocacy.globalvoicesonline.org/author/ellery-roberts-
biddle/). ****

**Internet Governance**

Costa Rican President Laura Chinchilla
[signed](http://www.freepress.net/blog/2012/11/30/costa-rica-president-
chinchilla-signs-declaration-internet-
freedom?akid=3960.9422198.YKNWex&rd=1&t=10) the [Declaration of Internet
Freedom](http://www.internetdeclaration.org/) in advance of the upcoming ITU
meeting in Dubai. Costa Rican courts declared Internet access to be a
fundamental right two years ago.

In the name of supporting innovation and keeping the cost of internet access
low, Kenya [will oppose broadening the mandate of the
ITU](http://www.biztechafrica.com/article/kenya-oppose-review-internet-
rules/4822/) at this week’s World Conference on International
Telecommunications in Dubai (WCIT-12)

South Africa moved closer to [hosting the administration of the .africa
generic Top-Level Domain (gTLD)](http://www.biztechafrica.com/article/namibia-
backs-zacr-bid/4829/) with Namibia formally backing the Rainbow Nation. South
Africa has already passed the 60% of support that ICANN requires with 75% of
African nations backing the bid. ****

**Censorship**

Internet and mobile communication in Syria [was
disconnected](http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/technology-20546302) late last week,
and has since been restored. [AllThingsD reported
](http://allthingsd.com/20121129/syria-has-disappeared-from-the-internet/)the
disappearance of the country’s 84 IP address blocks, detected by [networking
firm Renesys](http://www.renesys.com/blog/2012/11/syria-off-the-air.shtml). It
is [unclear](http://gigaom.com/2012/11/29/reports-syria-is-cut-off-from-the-
internet-and-how-it-may-have-happened/) how the country was disconnected by
the government, which was accused of planning a [nation-wide
massacre](http://killerapps.foreignpolicy.com/posts/2012/11/29/syrian_internet_cutoff_may_be_precursor_to_assad_offensive)
during the blackout. In the absence of connectivity the Speak2Tweet technology
used by Google and Twitter t[o allow mobile phone users to tweet by
voice](http://www.news-
republic.com/Web/ArticleWeb.aspx?regionid=3&articleid=5378437) during the
Egypt Revolution has been reactivated for use in Syria.

In Russia, [pressure has mounted on ISPs to self-
censor,](http://www.themoscowtimes.com/news/article/court-ruling-ramps-up-
pressure-on-internet-providers-to-block-content/471898.html) with the nation’s
highest court ruling that ISPs risk losing their license if they fail to block
what is deemed illegal content. Later in the week [a Moscow court ordered
Pussy Riot’s online videos](http://netprophet.tol.org/2012/12/03/moscow-court-
orders-removal-of-extremist-pussy-riot-online-videos/) be removed on the basis
that they are “extremist”. Google said it would comply with the order and
block the videos from view by YouTube users in Russia.

The [Electronic Frontier Foundation blogged about recent events in Central
Asia](https://www.eff.org/deeplinks/2012/11/whats-going-on-in-central-asia)
that suggest digital, print, and social media are under threat in the region.
[Reuters reports that Tajikistan has restricted access to
Facebook](http://www.reuters.com/article/2012/11/27/tajikistan-facebook-
idUSL5E8MR4EN20121127) specifically as a result of “mud and slander” posted by
agents paid $5,000 to $10,000 per comment, according to Beg Zukhurov, head of
the state-run communications service.

The [Wall Street Journal shows how Chinese
Internet](http://blogs.wsj.com/chinarealtime/2012/11/29/no-vpn-no-problem-a-
new-way-around-chinas-great-firewall/) users are able to circumvent The Great
Firewall using a technique that doesn’t involve setting up a VPN.

[Global Voices covers a Catalan
newspaper](https://globalvoicesonline.org/2012/11/25/spain-catalan-newspaper-
censors-blog-for-reporting-hunger-strike/) that deleted the blog post of a
Spanish cyber activist who had interviewed workers striking against telecom
giant Telefónica. She subsequently dissociated her blog with the newspaper in
order to republish her post on a personal blog. Since the story broke, the
newspaper has [re-posted](http://blogs.lavanguardia.com/guerreros-del-
teclado/luchamos-contra-telefonica-en-su-propio-terreno-35329) [es] her
original article to their website. ****

**Thuggery**

The [commander of Iran’s cybercrimes police unit was fired on
Saturday](http://www.nytimes.com/2012/12/02/world/middleeast/after-death-of-
sattar-beheshti-iranian-blogger-head-of-tehrans-cybercrimes-unit-is-
fired.html?ref=technology) over the death of an Iranian blogger arrested by
the national police. The blogger, Sattar Beheshti, [died early last
month](https://advocacy.globalvoicesonline.org/2012/11/15/netizenreport-
chinese-leadership/) while in police custody, allegedly from beatings
administered by interrogators in Tehran’s Evin prison.

**Sovereigns of Cyberspace**

Last week we
[covered](https://advocacy.globalvoicesonline.org/2012/11/29/netizenreport-
facebookistan/) Facebook's proposal to change its site governance policies.
The changes would affect user privacy and would also eliminate voting on
future changes. Fortunately, users have [one final chance to
vote](http://news.cnet.com/8301-1023_3-57556794-93/facebook-opens-vote-on-
policy-changes-addresses-privacy-concerns/?part=rss&subj=news&tag=title) on
the proposed changes before the right to vote is eliminated. You can do so
[here](https://apps.facebook.com/fbsitegovernance/).

The Global Post has [an
article](http://www.globalpost.com/dispatch/news/regions/asia-
pacific/china/120807/baidu-google-search-engine-international) on the global
ambitions of the Chinese search engine, Baidu.

**Privacy**

The Electronic Frontier Foundation published their [2012 E-Reader Privacy
Chart](https://www.eff.org/pages/reader-privacy-chart-2012). Their table shows
how different e-bookstores monitor and track their customer’s actions and
preferences.

A [US Senate committee approved a bill that
would](http://www.wired.com/threatlevel/2012/11/ecpa-reform-approved/) require
a warrant for law enforcement agencies to gain access to citizens’ email and
cloud storage. The measure still has to pass the full Senate and House to
become law, but won applause from the American Civil Liberties Union, and many
other free speech and privacy groups. ****

**National Policy**

Iran introduced a biometric ID card that would be loaded with encrypted
digital fingerprints and other personal information of the user. [The country
would require this ID card to access the
Internet](http://www.techdirt.com/articles/20121124/13340921130/irans-latest-
move-to-stifle-dissent-requiring-id-cards-to-go-online.shtml) and would block
access for all those without the card.

A [Tor Exit Node Operator in Austria had his hardware seized
](http://www.techdirt.com/articles/20121130/07495221185/tor-exit-node-
operator-charged-with-distributing-child-porn.shtml)and was [charged for the
distribution](http://arstechnica.com/tech-policy/2012/11/tor-operator-charged-
for-child-porn-transmitted-over-his-servers/) of child porn as a result of the
police failing to understand how the technology worked. ****

**Copyright**

Verteidige Dein Netz, a[ Google information campaign in Germany meaning
‘Defend Your Net’](http://mashable.com/2012/11/27/google-campaign-german-
copyright/), launched this week. It seeks to alert netizens to a German law
that would allow publishers to charge Google for the snippets of news that
appear in Google News or Google’s search results.

A user of anonymous file-sharing network Retroshare was prohibited by a German
court to use the network for [unknowingly passing on a copyrighted music
file](https://torrentfreak.com/anonymous-file-sharing-ruled-illegal-by-german-
court-121123/).

The implementation of the “six-strikes” anti-piracy system by the [Center for
Copyright Information (CCI)](http://www.copyrightinformation.org/), which
allows ISPs to locate user accounts involved in illegal file sharing and
punish copyright infringers, has been [postponed until early
2013](http://arstechnica.com/tech-policy/2012/11/six-strikes-copyright-
enforcement-postponed-until-2013/) due to Hurricane Sandy which affected the
testing schedules, according CCI.

A member of IMAGiNE Group, an in-theater camcording gang, [was handed a
40-month prison term](http://www.wired.com/threatlevel/2012/11/camcording-
pirate-40-months/), the longest sentence awarded for illegal file sharing in
US. ****

**Cybersecurity**

A number of websites in Romania with .ro domains including google.ro,
microsoft.ro, yahoo.ro and paypal.ro were [hijacked and redirected to a rogue
server](http://arstechnica.com/security/2012/11/google-microsoft-paypal-other-
romanian-sites-hijacked-by-dns-hackers/) by changing DNS entries. We reported
[similar
attack](https://advocacy.globalvoicesonline.org/2012/11/29/netizenreport-
facebookistan/)s that occurred in Pakistan last week.

An allegedly Egyptian hacker with the handle TheHell [is
selling](http://news.cnet.com/8301-1009_3-57554589-83/yahoo-mail-hijacking-
exploit-selling-for-$700/) a cross-site scripting (XSS) vulnerability in
Yahoo.com for US$700. The vulnerability allows the attacker to steal and
replace tracking cookies, as well as read and send emails of Yahoo webmail
users. Yahoo Director of Security [has
said](http://krebsonsecurity.com/2012/11/yahoo-email-stealing-exploit-
fetches-700/) that fixing the XSS vulnerability is easy once the offending URL
is found. ****

**Netizen Activism**

[Sana Saleem](https://globalvoicesonline.org/author/sana-saleem/), a Global
Voices author and executive board member of advocacy group [Bolo
Bhi](http://bolobhi.org/), [wrote an open letter](http://bolobhi.org/press-
release-public-statements/press-releases/to-the-netizens-of-
china-%E8%87%B4%E4%B8%AD%E5%9B%BD%E7%BD%91%E6%B0%91-from-pakistan/) to
mainland Chinese netizens on behalf of netizens from Pakistan to appeal for
solidarity against increasing censorship in Pakistan, which is reportedly
aided by Chinese telcos such as ZTE and Huawei.

[Julian Assange writes for the Huffington Post this week on the 2-year
anniversary](http://www.huffingtonpost.com/julian-assange/wikileaks-bradley-
manning-testifies-cablegate_b_2215387.html) of the release of US State
Department cables. He recaps the stories that have emerged since the Wikileaks
posted classified diplomatic cables. ****

**Cool Things**

Those planning a trip to Botswana and can now [scope out the country on
Google’s Street View ](http://www.biztechafrica.com/article/google-street-
view-live-botswana/4827/)as the capital Gaborone and the national parks of
Chobe and the Makgadikgadi pan were added to the mapping service.

**Publications and Studies:**

  * Center for Information Technology Policy: [No Longer Bit Players: Internet Governance & Economic Growth in Developing Countries](https://freedom-to-tinker.com/blog/goldstein/no-longer-bit-players-internet-governance-economic-growth-in-developing-countries/)
  * Internet Society: [Global Internet User Survey](https://www.internetsociety.org/news/global-internet-user-survey-reveals-attitudes-usage-and-behavior)

[Subscribe to the Netizen Report by
email](http://feedburner.google.com/fb/a/mailverify?uri=NetizenReport)

For upcoming events related to the future of citizen rights in the digital
age, see the[ Global Voices Events
Calendar](https://www.google.com/calendar/embed?src=9o8so5err9tvamd9t0ri9t181o%40group.calendar.google.com&ctz=America/New_York).

