It is not always easy to obtain information, data and documents from public
administrations, despite the fact that the information in their hands belongs
to the citizens. In practice, accessing information has many obstacles that
violate international treaties like the Council of Europe Convention on Access
to Official Documents and [more than 93 laws on access to information in the
world](http://www.rti-rating.org/).

This is one of the motives for which some civil society organizations,
dedicated to pro-transparency activism, have launched a series of online
platforms that allow people to request information from public institutions.
In Europe, [AsktheEU.org](http://www.asktheeu.org/fr)‘s main purpose is to
process requests to European institutions while [Your right to
know](http://www.tuderechoasaber.es/) [es], created and managed by the NGO
[Access Info Europe](http://www.access-info.org/es) in collaboration with
[Fundación Civio](http://www.civio.es/) [es], centers on Spanish institutions.
The platform allows any citizen to send information requests directly to the
desired administrations whether they be local, autonomous, or national. The
idea came from British website
[WhatDoTheyKnow?](http://www.whatdotheyknow.com/), created by MySociety and
based on [free software called Alaveteli.](http://www.alaveteli.org/) Similar
tools exist in Brazil, Germany, Chile, Kosovo, and Uruguay, with the recently
debuted [What do you know?](http://quesabes.org/) [es].

![](https://es.globalvoicesonline.org/wp-content/uploads/2012/11/logo.png)

With these applications, the information requests that each person sends to
institutions are public. This permits anyone to follow the request and see the
corresponding response. The system allows, among other things, public
institutions to save time by not having to answer the same requests multiple
times, and also helps the actual users who do not have to wait for an answer
to a question that has already been asked. It therefore improves the system of
transparency and makes it more efficient. The user has the opportunity to
indicate if the answer was satisfactory or not and can even provide a resource
in case he or she did not obtain the information requested by the deadline set
for it.

[![](https://es.globalvoicesonline.org/wp-content/uploads/2012/11/logo-
asktheeu.png)](http://quesabes.org/)

![Graph with results of Astheeu.org platform after one
year.](https://es.globalvoicesonline.org/wp-content/uploads/2012/11/Asktheeu-
results.jpg)

Graph with results of Astheeu.org platform after one year.

The results vary from one country to the next depending on the national laws
implemented for access to information. In Spain, the legislation excludes a
lot of information from the scope of the law and permits administrative
silence, which is to say that if they do not respond, the request is
considered denied. Spain is the only country in the European Union with a
population of over 1 million that does not have a transparency law (except
regarding environmental material). Although the bill is currently awaiting
amendments in the Parliament, experts who have already analyzed it consider it
insufficient, and that it is [below international
standards](http://www.access-info.org/en/spain-coalicion-pro-
acceso/286-ultima-oportunidad-para-mejorar-la-ley-de-transparencia) [es]. If
the text of the Transparency Law is approved as it stands, no major changes to
the current lack of transparency will be made.

There are other similar initiatives that, like those mentioned previously,
take advantage of the Internet to put it at the service of access to
information, demand the right to know, and create an incentive for
institutions’ accountability. In this sense,
[TweetyourMEP](http://apps.spaghettiopendata.org/tweetyourmep?mep_name&mep_localParty&mep_country=DE&mep_faction)
as well as [Tweetminster](http://tweetminster.co.uk/) and
[TweetCongress](http://wegf.org/en/2010/09/tweet-mep-europe-democracy/)
facilitate the possibility of sending messages via Twitter to representatives
of the European Union or other politicians, whom the users want to speak to.

![](https://es.globalvoicesonline.org/wp-content/uploads/2012/11/reconoce-mi-
derecho-375x267.jpg)

Access to information is a fundamental right linked to freedom of expression.
Information is the key to forming public opinions and, as such, to citizenship
participation in the decision making process. Institutions must answer the
requests not only out of obligation but also to regain citizen confidence in
those that represent them. If institutions were more transparent and
accountable for their actions, the gap between the two would improve notably.
A [CIS
study](http://politica.elpais.com/politica/2012/10/08/actualidad/1349729395_320853.html)
[es] pointed out that the third problem for one in four Spaniards is political
management. It is no coincidence that this occurs in Spain, taking into
account that this country does not apply Article 10 of the European Convention
on Human Rights which protects “the freedom to receive or communicate
information or ideas.” In April 2009, the European Tribunal on Human Rights
recognize that the right to freedom of expression [specifically includes the
right to access to information](http://www.access-
info.org/documents/Access_Docs/Advancing/Spain/Preguntas_y_respuestas.pdf)
[es] in the hands of public entities.

In the following video, the director of the NGO Access Info Europe, Helen
Darbishire, explains how and why to use the Asktheeu.org platform:

<http://youtu.be/uOvVdWafjEU>

