When at the end of last year, [Belo
Horizonte](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Belo_Horizonte)’s [en] City Hall
published a decree banning events of _any nature_ from taking place at one of
the most popular squares in the city, it was certainly not expecting to bring
“beach life” to a Brazilian inland mountain town.

Belo Horizonte is the capital city of the state of [Minas
Gerais](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Minas_Gerais) [en] in the southeast
region of Brazil. Away from the coast, surrounded by mountains, the city has a
vibrant cultural life with space for all subcultures and counter-cultures to
co-exist and express themselves through various forms of leisurely gatherings
and events. _[Praça da
Estação](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pra%C3%A7a_Rui_Barbosa) _[en] __
(Station Square) is a popular such venue.

**[![](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2010/06/4399712927_821c61a3c6.jpg)](http://www.flickr.com/photos/psychojoanes/4399712927/)**

Flickr Photo: João Perdigão, CC Licensed

From here, the city was literally born, for this is the site of the old
central station, which served as the “port of entry” for people and materials
during the construction and early days of Belo Horizonte in the late 19th
century. The railroad is still used by those coming from the western and
northern parts of the city, and it serves a line going all the way to the
coastal city of Vitória, capital of the neighboring state of Espírito Santo.
The old station building has been transformed into the [Museum of Arts and
Crafts ](http://www.mao.org.br/)bringing tourists to the city center. The
large square in front of the station has in recent years been renovated, and
even possesses two ground level inviting fountains that can be turned off to
accommodate large gatherings. _Praça da Estação_ is also the departing point
of Belo Horizonte’s _[Critical Mass](http://www.critical-mass.info/) _[en] and
the main venue for the popular annual festival _Arraial de Belô_ , as well as
other live shows and various events that light up the social life of the
_Belorizontinos_. Or was?

Last December [in a decree published by the Mayor of the
city](http://portal6.pbh.gov.br/dom/iniciaEdicao.do?method=DetalheArtigo&pk=1017732),
the square was condemned to become an empty space on the basis that it was
necessary to guarantee public security, keep agglomeration to a minimum and
preserve the public patrimony. Immediately, the decision met strong opposition
by the citizens, for whom the square is an essential part of the city’s
cultural life and who, as tax payers, contributed to its renovation. Bloggers
discussed the new law, [venturing the possibility of the decree being one step
on the path to gentrification, in preparation for the Olympic Games of
2014](http://www.midiaindependente.org/pt/blue/2010/01/462799.shtml).

A protest named [_Vá de Branco_](http://vadebranco.blogspot.com/) (Wear white)
was called for January 7, gathering around 50 people who were looking for
answers:

> Porque a Secretaria de Segurança Patrimonial não propôs um debate com a
> população sobre a depredação na Praça da Estação?  
>  Porque os eventos foram proibidos na Praça da Estação e não na Praça do
> Papa?  
>  Porque poucas pessoas entram no Museu de Artes e Ofícios que fica na Praça
> da Estação?  
>  Qual é o maior espaço central para eventos gratuitos em Belo Horizonte?
> Quais foram as depredações dos últimos eventos?

Why is that the Bureau of Security Asset has not proposed a debate with the
population about the degradation in Station Square?  
Why were the events banned in Station Square and not at the Plaza of the Pope?  
Why only few people enter the Museum of Arts and Crafts which is in Station
Square?  
What is the largest central space for free events in Belo Horizonte? What were
the depredations of the recent events?

From this meeting it was first agreed the need for the birth of [a grassroots
movement free of party affiliations and in favor of free local
culture](http://pedreiranavidraca.blogspot.com/2010/01/va-de-branco-o-day-
after.html). And from the discussions that followed, a new idea was born:
meeting in the square on Saturdays, and bring food, drinks, bikinis/shorts,
towels, umbrellas, drums and guitars. In sum, turn the square into the city’s
beach. [An idea spread through the web’s social networks and put into practice
by local citizens](http://www.hojeemdia.com.br/cmlink/hoje-em-
dia/minas/manifestantes-fantasiam-para-debochar-da-lei-que-veta-ato-publico-
na-praca-da-estac-o-1.64878).

**[![](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2010/06/praprapraia00005c.jpg)](http://www.flickr.com/photos/luiznavarro/4331772465/)**

Flickr Photo: Luiz Navarro, CC Licensed

Ever since, _Praia da Estação_ (Station Beach) became a stopping point in the
Saturday routine of urban wanderers. A relaxed, humorous and yet assertive way
to protest, an act of civil disobedience that make the delights of street
vendors and bars around the square. The fountains, which are usually turned on
at 11 am and 5pm sharp, remain strangely shut down on Saturdays, but
protestors occasionally gather enough change to get a water-barrel truck to
come by and hose the crowd.

Other attempts to agitate ‘Station Beach’were the [_Eventões_ or
_BigEvents_](http://eventao.wikispaces.com/), a call for people to bring
“events of any nature” to a square where supposedly these had been banned. The
_Eventões_ gathered hundreds of people and caused some tension when police
intervened to stop people from bringing in sound systems. The first _Eventão_
ended with beach goers moving to the road and blocking traffic for a while,
until moving to the also popular _Viaduto_ , only a couple of blocks away from
the square, well-known for hosting Belo Horizonte’s _MCs Duel_ every Friday
night.

[![](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2010/06/eventão2.jpg)](http://eventao.wikispaces.com/Fotos+Event%C3%A3o)

Photo: Eventão (Big Events), CC Licensed

The open blog [Praça Livre BH](http://pracalivrebh.wordpress.com/) became more
than a mere informative of all the beach events. It has also extended its
focus to matters of gentrification, evictions and occupations, offering
solidarity to other popular movements in Brazil, like that of the students
from Florianópolis, fighting for free bus fares. And some beach goers who
protest on Saturdays in the coolest manner possible get serious during the
week, attending public audiences in city hall. [The first one took place on
March 24th](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=VQo5bdPk-
cw&feature=player_embedded) and in spite of the absence of local power high
officials – such as the Mayor [Márcio
Lacerda](http://pt.wikipedia.org/wiki/Marcio_Lacerda), the president of the
foundation for local culture Taís Pimentel, the local administration secretary
Fernando Cabral, and Belotur’s president (the city’s tourism company) Júlio
Pires – protestors could articulate their concerns regarding the uses of
public spaces paid by public money, to Ângela Maria Ferreira, the regional
cabinet-chief representing the above mentioned officials. They were assured by
her that the situation was temporary.

  
[Station Beach – Public Hearing – Video
Protest](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=VQo5bdPk-cw&feature=player_embedded)

In fact, finally on May 4th, the decree was revoked. But with one twist.
Events on the square are now subjected to a [minimum tax of R$9000 (USD$4950),
which will only allow privately sponsored shows to take
place](http://pedreiranavidraca.blogspot.com/2010/05/manifestantes-convidam-
populacao-pro-2.html):

> Tal medida materializada pelos decretos 13.960 e 13.961 e editada na ultima
> terça-feira 4 de maio, pretende dar aos espaços públicos o mesmo tratamento
> dos “salões de festa”, pode?

Such measure materialized by decrees 13.960 and 13.961 and edited last tuesday
May 4th pretends to treat public spaces like ballrooms, can you believe it?

And indeed, it now appears that the square will be hosting the virtual world
cup sponsored by coca-cola company. Food and drink vendors, chemical toilets,
big screens, security and the inevitable ticket offices will take over the
square, and the discussion around the uses given by City Hall to the square
intensifies. [Citizens are now
wondering](http://pedreiranavidraca.blogspot.com/2010/05/manifestantes-
convidam-populacao-pro-2.html) if this is the future of their public spaces:
controlling who has access at any given time and charge for it.

> Essas intervenções se definem por moldes dos velhos projetos característicos
> de todas as modernas cidades erguidas sob os pressupostos unitários do
> capitalismo: limpeza de aspecto fundamentalmente classista, projetos infra-
> estruturais de custos estratosféricos, restauração de pontos turísticos e
> outros.

These interventions are defined by the patterns of old projects, typical of
all modern cities which were built under the unitarian assumptions of
capitalism: fundamentally class-minded clean-up aspect, infrastructure
projects of stratospheric costs, restoration of tourist sights and others.

Such concerns meet current debates around the function of urban spaces. In
anticipation of the next world cup in 2014, hosted by Brazil, and the Olympic
Games, coming to Rio de Janeiro in 2016, citizens are now seeing the first
signs of gentrifying public policy, imported from abroad as part of a global
tendency of power to tighten control over the populations of the world. In
Brazil, [such concerns](http://www.globalpost.com/dispatch/study-
abroad/100519/brazil-olympics-rio-favelas) have been felt and denounced [in
various cities, particularly Rio and São
Paulo](http://guaciara.wordpress.com/2009/10/04/rio-2016/).

> Invariavelmente, as olimpíadas dão início a uma _blitzkrieg_ contra pobres e
> moradores de rua, criando um verdadeiro estado de exceção. Zonas da cidade
> são praticamente fechadas a quem não tiver ingresso, as ruas são socialmente
> higienizadas e a polícia passa a agir com truculência animalesca contra os
> não convidados para a festança de gringo que vamos montar.

Invariably, the olympic games will start a _blitzkrieg_ against the poor and
the homeless, creating a state of exception. Areas of the city will be
practically closed to those that don't have a ticket, the streets will be
socially cleaned up and the police will start acting with animal ferocity
against those who aren't invited to the gringo party we will be giving.

So, although there might not be any space in the square for a beach lover’s
towel during the coming world cup, the _Praça Livre_ _Movement_ continues the
struggle to free public spaces, and asks [from its blog, if the new decree
will fall like the one it came to
revoke](http://pracalivrebh.wordpress.com/2010/05/28/perguntas-de-luther-o-
cala-boca-caiu-bem/). Its implied answer lays in public action and the
question becomes: how strong will this movement become and how many more such
movements will we see rising in Brazil during the new decade.

All hyperlinks lead to articles written in Portuguese unless marked otherwise.

