In Puerto Rico, the art blogs have become vital spaces of discussion, debate,
deliberation, critique and information. Blogs like Carlos Antonio Otero's [_El
Naufragio de las Palabras_](http://www.elnaufragiodelaspalabras.com/) [ES],
Pedro Velez's [_Box
Score_](http://boxscoreendivselpuebloylacultura.blogspot.com/) [ES], Arnaldo
Roman y Lilliam Nieves’ [_Trance Líquido_](www.tranceliquido.com), Abdiel
Segarra's [_Conboca_](http://www.conboca.org/)[
](http://www.conboca.org/)[ES], Carmen Olmo Terrasa's [_Donde Veo
Arte_](http://dondeveoarte.com/) [ES], Javier Martinez's
[_Autogiro_](http://autogiro.cronicaurbana.com/) [ES], Teo Freytes’ [_MSA
Xperimental_](http://msa-x.msa-x.org/) [ES] and Karla Marie Ostolaza's
[_Fractal_](http://www.thefractal.net/) [ES] are forums for discussion,
interchange and exposition of contemporary art. They have obtained what other
virtual entrepreneurs anxiously desire: to convert their spaces into necessary
references and centers of a type of information that you simply can't find in
any other place.

Following is an interview with the artist, blogger and reporter Carlos Antonio
Otero, who started his blog in 2008. This interview – in an abbreviated
version – was originally published in [Diálogo](http://dialogodigital.com/),
the University of Puerto Rico's monthly.

[![](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2010/05/Picture-1.png)](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2010/05/Picture-1.png)

**Global Voices (GV)-** Why did you start an art blog? What do you write about
in your blog?

**Carlos Antonio Otero (CAO)-** The idea came up after interviewing the artist
Teresa López for a newspaper report about contemporary art and she asked me if
I had a blog about my pieces. I said no, and then she asked me why I didn't
use this platform to channel my interest in documenting part of the
contemporary art scene on the Island. My principal interest is to show which
artists are doing the most work in the country, narrate their histories, and
present and talk about their works of art. The restlessness is owed to the
fact that the traditional communication media are not documenting the
contemporary art scene, in terms of the new proposals and the emerging and
non-emerging artists. There's a very particular emphasis on the established
artists, and even inside this group, very few are talked about. Always the
people are the same, and when one converses with people who don't necessarily
know art, they think that art is what the media present about this or that
artist, and they don't know about a whole world that is much bigger and much
more diverse, even in our Island.

[![](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2010/05/Picture-2.png)](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2010/05/Picture-2.png)

**GV-** When did Puerto Rican art blogs begin to proliferate?

**CAO-** The first effort to document the local cultural scene on the Internet
arose in El Cuarto del Quenepón, created in the beginning of the 90's by
[María de Máter O'Neill](http://www.marimateroneill.com/). The actual facility
of a blog didn't exist, but she worked hard; she had collaborators and broke
with the traditional media to divulge information that she didn't find space
to diffuse elsewhere. That effort lasted some years and with the arrival and
proliferation of blogs other “sites” came up… El Naufragio is one of the most
recent and has gotten a satisfactory acceptance because people have recognized
the seriousness of the work that it does. Practically, we became a network
because we all know each other, recognize each other's work, and make
references to the information that we publish in our platforms. And above all,
it's about a voluntary nonprofit effort. That's very important, because we
don't review exhibits and elaborate about the work of one or another artist in
exchange for something. It's simply a commitment to give voice to a scene
that's there and even the connoisseurs of art on the Island refuse to
recognize.

**GV-** Why do you think the art blogosphere in/about Puerto Rico has grown so
much?

**CAO-** It's an unstructured movement in which we all agree, and it has
proliferated precisely because of the need to tell the contemporary history of
art that isn't being told anywhere else. And there is a need for this
information; if not, we wouldn't exist. We have a generation of artists who
have not experienced the formal critique of art; we don't know where our
critics speak or write. We don't see that reflection **,** and the academy
seems to produce mutes. So the blogs and the different platforms of the web
have become the alternative. Even with their defects and virtues, even with
their limitations, blogs are a serious and valid alternative in the majority
of cases.

[![](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2010/05/Picture-3.png)](https://globalvoicesonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2010/05/Picture-3.png)

**GV-** What has the Internet offered art bloggers as a communication
platform?

**CAO-** The Internet is the most viable, efficient and cost-effective
platform for art bloggers, and bloggers of any other subject. We can't make a
newspaper or magazine for the same cost, and neither can we make a television
or radio program. So the Internet offers the possibility of communication and
diffusion **,** and the public has all these alternatives to choose whatever
they like or whatever fills their needs. Because of the diffusion, you can
read anything in any part of the world. El Naufragio has followers in the
United States, Spain, London and Latin America, and the same thing happens
with the rest of the blogs.

In the art world there's this interesting blog dynamic that we haven't seen in
other areas in Puerto Rico. There are also various interesting literary blogs
**.** I haven't heard if anything has happened in sports, and in news
reporting I haven't seen anything similar either. In the case of news
reporting maybe we're used to the media validating us, which is a very
traditional structure or dynamic. And perhaps this is because we're used to
news reporting being done by salaried professionals. In the case of art, as
artists you make your way and make your space, and you don't paint, you don't
draw, you don't make sculptures or videos, or whatever it may be, necessarily
because someone is paying you. In art there's a necessity to release
creativity, to share a proposal, to make a commentary, and it's done because
it's done. And this moves you to do things, sometimes against all obstacles –
obstacles that stem from economic limitations, from lack of support, from
anonymity.

